Chapter 9: SOCIAL ORGANIZATION WITHOUT LOVE

I have contrasted the simple flock organization of the anonym- ous individuals with the social order built on personal relation- ships in order to emphasize that these two mechanisms of social behaviour do, to a large extent, exclude one another; but this does not in any way imply that there are no other types of social organization. Among animals there are other relationships between certain individuals which bind them for long periods, even for life, without the involvement of personal ties. Just as in human society there are business partners who work happily together but would never think of meeting outside office hours, so there are in many animal species individual ties arising only through a common interest of the partners in a joint ‘enterprise’. The anthropomorphizing animal lover will not be pleased to hear that in many birds, including some that live in lifelong ‘matrimony’, male and female have no interest in each other’s company unless they have a common function to fulfil at the nest or in the service of the brood. An extreme case of such a bond in which the partners are bound neither by mutual recog- nition nor by love is seen in the tie called by Heinroth ‘local mating’. Males and females of the South European green lizard, for example, defend their territories against members of the same sex only. The male takes no action against an encroaching female, indeed he cannot because he is prevented by the inhibi- tion described on page 119 from attacking a female. The female cannot attack even a young male inferior to herself in strength, because an immense innate respect for the insignia of maleness prevents her from doing so. Thus male and female lizard would demarcate their territories as independently of each other as animals of two entirely different species which keep no intra- specific distance from each other, were it not for the fact that they both show similar ‘taste’ in choosing a dwelling. But neither in our large and well-planned enclosure, forty yards square, nor in nature, is there an unlimited amount of tempting accom- modation in the form of hollows between stones, holes in the earth and other such places. So it is inevitable that sometimes a male and a female, having no individual distance, move into the same dwelling. And since two dwellings are seldom equally use- ful and attractive, it is not surprising that in our enclosure a certain particularly favourable hollow, facing south, was soon occupied by the strongest male and the strongest female in our lizard colony. Though they do not have a particular preference for each other, animals living in such close contact copulate more frequently with each other than with a chance partner met on the territorial border. If one of the ‘local mates’ was removed experimentally, it soon ‘got around’ that a particularly desirable male or female territory was vacant. Then severe territorial fights took place between the interested parties, with the usual result that by next day the next strongest male or female had taken possession of the dwelling-place and of the sexual partner too.
It is astonishing that our white storks should behave almost exactly like the lizards, a fact quite at variance with the gruesome story told wherever white storks nest and sportsmen meet. From time to time some daily paper reports how the storks, before leaving for Africa, hold a tribunal where all crimes of individual storks are tried, and females guilty of adultery are condemned to death and executed mercilessly. In reality a stork is not very fond of his wife, and it is very doubtful whether he would even recognize her away from the nest. A stork couple is certainly not held together by that magic elastic bond which, in geese, ravens, or jackdaws, evidently pulls harder as the mates get farther away from each other. The male stork and his wife almost never fly together at a fixed distance like the mates of the species men- tioned above and many others, and they even migrate at different times. In the spring the male stork returns to the nesting-place much earlier than his wife or, to be more precise, the female who shares the same nest. While he was director of the Rossitten bird observatory, Professor Ernst Schüz made the following enlightening observations of the storks nesting on his roof. One year the male came back early, and after he had been home for some time and was standing on his nest, a strange female appeared. He greeted her with chattering, and she at once made herself at home on the nest, greeting him in the same way. He admitted her without hesitation and treated her in every detail exactly as a male stork treats his long-awaited wife on her return. Professor Schüz told me he could have sworn that the new- comer was the old female, if the leg-bands – or rather the lack of them – had not taught him better, or perhaps I should say worse.
The two were busily occupied repairing and relining the nest when suddenly the old wife arrived. The two females started an embittered territorial fight which the male watched quite dis- interestedly and without attempting to defend his old wife against the new one, or vice versa. Finally the new wife flew off, beaten by the ‘legitimate’ one, and after the change of partners the male continued with his nesting business exactly where he had been interrupted by the fight of the rivals. He showed no sign of having noticed the change of wives that had twice taken place. What a remarkable contrast to the myth of the stork tribunal! If such a bird caught his wife in flagrante with the neighbour on the next roof he probably would not even recognize her as his own!
Night herons behave very similarly to storks, but there are several other species of herons in which, as Otto Koenig has shown, the mates certainly recognize each other individually and associate up to a certain extent even away from the nest. I know night herons well, because for many years I had an arti- ficially settled colony of tame, free-flying birds of this species in my garden and I was thus able to observe their pairing, nest- building, brooding, and baby-rearing, in minute detail. When two mates met on neutral ground, that is at a certain distance from their common nest territory, whether they were fishing in the pond or coming to be fed in a field about a hundred yards away from their nesting tree, they showed absolutely no signs of recognizing each other. They chased each other just as furiously from a good fishing-place and fought just as angrily over the food I gave them, as any other two utterly unrelated birds. The mates never flew together, and the formation of larger or smaller swarms, when they flew down to the Danube at dusk to fish, bore the character of anonymous flocks.
Equally anonymous is the organization of the nesting colony. It is entirely different from that of the jackdaw colony which consists of an exclusive circle of old friends. In spring every night heron in reproductive mood wants to have its nest near, but not too near, that of another bird. One has the impression that some squabbling with a hostile neighbour is essential to the bird in order to get it into a proper nesting mood. Just as in the case of the nest territory of the gannet, or the sitting place of a starling, the minimum diameter of a nest territory of a night heron is determined by the span of neck and beak of two neigh- bours, and the centres of two nests can never be nearer than twice the span of a bird’s neck and beak. Among the long- necked herons this is a considerable distance.
I cannot say for certain whether neighbours recognize each other, but I had the impression that a night heron never got used to the approach of another one that had to pass very closely by on the way to its own nest. One would expect that after innumerable repetitions of this procedure the silly bird would eventually realize that the passer-by, whose nervous look and flattened feathers expressed anything but thirst for conquest, only wanted to squeeze past. But the night heron never under- stands that his neighbour is himself a territory owner and there- fore not dangerous, and he cannot differentiate between the neighbour and a stranger who is a potential usurper of territory. Even the non-anthropomorphizing observer cannot help being irritated by the ever-recurring clamour and spiteful beak duels that take place, day and night, in a night heron colony. One would think that this unnecessary waste of energy could easily be obviated, for night herons are fundamentally able to recog- nize fellow-members of their species. The young of a brood know each other even as tiny nestlings and attack any strange night heron baby, even of their own age, if it is introduced into the nest. The fledglings keep together for a long time, seek pro- tection from each other and, standing back to back, defend themselves against attack. It is thus the more astonishing that nesting night herons never treat the owners of bordering territories ‘as though they knew’ that these were settled house-holders with no intention of robbing a neighbour of his territory.
Why, one asks, has the night heron never ‘hit on the idea’ of making use of his proved ability to recognize his fellows for the purpose of selective habituation to his territorial neighbours, thus saving himself an incredible amount of energy and annoy- ance? The question is difficult to answer and probably it is asked wrongly. In nature we find not only that which is expedient, but also everything which is not so inexpedient as to endanger the existence of the species.
Surprisingly, there is a fish which is capable of doing what the night heron cannot do: it can accustom itself to its settled and harmless neighbour and thus avoid the eliciting of unnecessary aggression. This fish is a member of a group well known for breaking fish records: the cichlids. In the North African oasis, Gafsah, there lives a little mouthbreeding cichlid about whose social behaviour we have learned through the close field observa- tion of Rosl Kirchshofer. The males build a closely knit colony of nests, or rather spawning hollows, in which the females lay their eggs. As soon as they are all fertilized the female takes them in her mouth and transports them to other places, hatching them in shallow water, thickly grown with plants, where eventually the young are reared. Every male possesses only a relatively tiny territory and this is almost completely filled by the spawning hollow which the fish constructs by fanning with his tail and digging with his mouth. Every male tries to entice every passing female into his hollow by certain ritualized courtship move- ments and by guiding the female to his own nest. The males spend a very large part of the year performing these tactics, in fact it is possible that they are in the spawning place all the year round. There is no reason to suppose that they often change their territory, thus every fish has plenty of time to get to know his neighbour and it has long been known that cichlids are capable of this. Dr Kirchshofer performed the laborious task of catching all the males of a nesting colony and marking them individually. Every fish knew the owners of neighbouring terri- tories very exactly and tolerated them peacefully at closest quar- ters, while he immediately attacked every stranger which approached his spawning hollow even from farther away.
This peacefulness of the male mouthbreeders of Gafsah, depending on individual recognition of their fellows, is not yet that bond of friendship which we shall describe in the next chapter but one. In these fish there is not yet that attraction between personally acquainted individuals which keeps them permanently together – and this is the objectively demonstrable sign of friendship. But in a field of forces in which mutual repulsion is ever present every lessening of the active repulsive force between two particular objects has consequences which are, in effect, equivalent to attraction. In still another respect the non-aggression pact of neighbouring mouthbreeder males resembles true friendship: the lessening of repulsion, as well as the attraction of being friends, depends on the degree of acquaintanceship of the individuals concerned. Selective habitu- ation to all stimuli emanating from individually known mem- bers of the species is probably the prerequisite for the origin of every personal bond and it is probably its precursor in the phylogenetic evolution of social behaviour.
Generally, other conditions being equal, mere acquaintance- ship with a fellow-member of the species exerts a remarkably strong inhibitory effect on aggressive behaviour. Among human beings this phenomenon can regularly be observed in railway carriages, incidentally an excellent place in which to study the function of aggression in the spacing out of territories. All the rude behaviour patterns serving for the repulsion of seat- competitors and intruders, such as covering empty places with coats or bags, putting up one’s feet, or pretending to be asleep, are brought into action against the unknown individual only. As soon as the new-comer turns out to be even the merest acquain- tance they disappear and are replaced by rather shamefaced politeness.
