Chapter 11: THE BOND

In the three different types of social order described in the foregoing chapters relations between individual beings are completely impersonal. It is characteristic of the supra-individual community that one individual can be exchanged for almost any other. We have seen the first trace of personal relationships in the territory-owning males of the Gafsah mouthbreeders which form non-aggression pacts with their neighbours and are only aggressive towards strange intruders. However, this is only a pas- sive tolerance of the known neighbour. Neither of the indi- viduals yet has for the other an attraction that could cause him to follow if the partner should swim away, or, should the partner stay in one place, to stay there too for his sake, or still less to search for him actively should he disappear. These behaviour patterns of an objectively demonstrable mutual attachment con- stitute the personal tie which is the subject of this chapter. From now on, I will call it the bond, and the society which it holds together, the group. The group is thus characterized by the fact that, like the anonymous crowd, it is held together by reactions elicited by one member in another, but in contrast to the impersonal social order, the attachment reactions are inseparably linked with the individualities of group members.
As in the mutual tolerance pact of Gafsah mouthbreeders, it is a prerequisite of group formation that individual animals should be capable of reacting selectively to the individuality of every other member; but those mouthbreeders which react in a differ- ent way to the neighbour and to the stranger do so in one place only, in their own nest hollow; and a number of additional circumstances are involved in this process of special habituation. It is open to question whether the fish would treat the neighbour in the same way if they both suddenly found themselves in an unfamiliar place; but true group formation is characterized by its independence of place. The part which every member plays in the life of every other one remains the same in an amazing number of different environmental situations, that is to say, per- sonal recognition of the partner in all possible conditions of life is the essential for every group formation. Recognition of the partner must always be learnt individually.
When we consider the series of life patterns in the ascending scale, from the simpler to the higher, we encounter group for- mation in the above sense for the first time among higher tele- osteans, namely spiny rayed fish, particularly cichlids, in the closely related fish of the perch family: the demoiselles, angel- fish and butterfly-fish. We have met with these three families of tropical marine fish in the first two chapters, and it is significant that they possess a particularly large measure of intra-specific aggression.
In discussing ‘anonymous flock’ formation, I have stressed that this most widespread and most primitive form of social order did not arise from the family, the unit of parents and children, as it did in the case of the quarrelsome rat-clans and in the packs of other mammals. In a rather different sense, the phylogenetic prototype of the personal bond and of group formation is the attachment between two partners which together tend their young. From such a tie a family can easily arise, but the bond with which we are here concerned is of a much more special kind. We will now describe how this bond comes about in cichlids.
In observing, with a thorough knowledge of all the expres- sion movements, the processes which in cichlids effect the com- ing together of partners of opposite sex, it is a nerve-racking experience to see the prospective mates in a state of real fury with each other. Again and again they are close to starting a vicious fight, again and again the ominous flare-up of the aggressive drive is only just inhibited and murder side-stepped by a hairsbreadth. Our apprehension is by no means formed on a false interpretation of the particular expression movements observed in our fish: every fish breeder knows that it is risky to put male and female of a cichlid species together in a tank, and that there is considerable danger of casualty if pair formation is not constantly supervised.
Under natural conditions habituation is largely responsible for preventing hostilities between the prospective mates. We can best imitate natural conditions by putting several young, still peaceable fish in a large aquarium and letting them grow up together. Pair formation then takes place in the following way: on reaching sexual maturity a certain fish, usually a male, takes possession of a territory and drives out all the others. Later, when a female is willing to pair, she approaches the territory owner cautiously and, if she acknowledges the superior rank of the male, responds to his attacks which, at first, are quite seriously meant, in the way described on pages 100–1, with the so-called ‘coyness behaviour’, consisting, as we already know, of behaviour elements arising partly from mating, and partly from escape drives. If, despite the clearly aggression-inhibiting inten- tions of these gestures, the male attacks, the female may leave his territory for a short time, but sooner or later she returns. This is repeated over a varying period until each of the two animals is so accustomed to the presence of the other that the aggression- eliciting stimuli inevitably proceeding from the male lose their effect.
As in many similar processes of specific habituation, here, too, all fortuitously occurring accessory factors become part of the entire situation to which the animal finally becomes accus- tomed. If any of these factors is missing, the whole effect of the habituation will be upset. This applies in particular to the begin- ning stages of peaceful co-habitation, when the partner must always appear on the accustomed route, from the accustomed side, the lighting must always be the same, and so on; otherwise each fish considers the other as a fight-releasing stranger. Trans- ference to another aquarium can at this stage completely upset pair formation. The closer the acquaintanceship becomes, the more the picture of the partner becomes independent of its background, a process well known to the Gestalt psychologist as also to the investigators of conditioned reflexes. Finally, the bond with the partner becomes so independent of accidental condi- tions that pairs can be transferred, even transported far away without rupture of their bond. At most, pair formation ‘regresses’ under these circumstances, that is ceremonies of courtship and appeasement may recur, which in long-mated partners had long ago disappeared, having ceded to force of habit.
If pair formation runs an undisturbed course, the male’s sexual behaviour patterns gradually come to the fore. There may already be traces of these behaviour patterns in his first seriously intended attacks on the female, but now they increase in inten- sity and frequency without, however, causing the disappearance of the expression movements implying aggressive mood. In the female, however, the original escape-readiness and ‘submissive- ness’ decrease very quickly. Movements expressive of fear or escape mood disappear in the female more and more with the consolidation of pair formation, in fact they sometimes disap- pear so quickly that, during my early observations of cichlids, I overlooked them altogether and for years erroneously believed that no ranking order existed between the partners of this family. We have already heard (pages 100–1) what part ranking order plays in the mutual recognition of the sexes, and it persists, latently, even when the female has completely stopped making submissive gestures to her mate. Only on the rare occasions when an old pair quarrels does she do it again.
At first nervously submissive, the female gradually loses her fear of the male, and with it every inhibition against showing aggressive behaviour, so that one day her initial shyness is gone and she stands, fearless and truculent, in the middle of the terri- tory of her mate, her fins outspread in an attitude of self-display, and wearing a dress which, in some species, is scarcely dis- tinguishable from that of the male. As may be expected, the male gets furious, for the stimulus situation presented by the female lacks nothing of the key stimuli which, from experimental stimulus analysis we know to be strongly fight-releasing. So he also assumes an attitude of broadside display, discharges some tail-beats, then rushes at his mate, and for fractions of a second it looks as if he will ram her – and then the thing happens which prompted me to write this book: the male does not waste time replying to the threatening of the female; he is far too excited for that, he actually launches a furious attack which, however, is not directed at his mate but, passing her by narrowly, finds its goal in another member of his species. Under natural conditions this is regularly the territorial neighbour.
This is a classical example of the process which we call, with Tinbergen, a redirected activity. It is characterized by the fact that an activity is released by one object but discharged at another, because the first one, while presenting stimuli specifically eliciting the response, simultaneously emits others which inhibit its dis- charge. A human example is furnished by the man who is very angry with someone and hits the table instead of the other man’s jaw, because inhibition prevents him from doing so, although his pent-up anger, like the pressure within a volcano, demands outlet. Most of the known cases of redirected activity concern aggressive behaviour elicited by an object which simultaneously evokes fear. In this special case which he called ‘bicycling’, B. Grzimek first recognized and described the principle of redirection. The ‘bicyclist’ in this case is the man who bows to his superior and treads on his inferior. The mechanism effecting this behaviour is particularly clear when an animal approaches its opponent from some distance, then, on drawing near, notices how terrifying it really is, and now, since it cannot check the already started attack, it vents its anger on some innocent bystander or even on some inanimate substitute object.
There are, of course, innumerable further forms of redirected movements, and various combinations of opposing drives can produce them. The special case of the cichlid male is very sig- nificant for our theme, because analogous processes play a decisive role in the family and social life of a great many higher animals and man. The problem of how to prevent inter-marital fighting is solved in a truly remarkable way not only by not inhibiting the aggression elicited in each partner by the presence of the other, but by putting it to use in fighting the hostile neighbour. This solution has evidently been found independently in several unrelated groups of vertebrates.
The averting of the undesirable aggression elicited by the partner and its canalizing in the desired direction of the terri- torial neighbour is, in the dramatic case of the cichlid male, no momentary decision which the animal can make or not make at the critical moment. It has long been ritualized and has become a part of the fixed instinct inventory of the particular species. Everything that we have learned, in Chapter 5, about the process of ritualization helps us to understand that from the redirected activity a fixed one can arise which, like all others, must find its discharge, and hence presents a need, an independent motive for action.
In prehistoric times, probably around the cretaceous period (a million years or so make no difference here), a similar case of redirected activity must have happened by chance, just as the tobacco-smoking of the Red Indian chiefs described in Chapter 5 happened by chance, otherwise no rite could have arisen. One of the great constructors of the change in species, selection, always requires some fortuitously arising material to work on, and its blind but busy colleague, mutation, provides the material.
As with many physical characteristics and many instinctive motor patterns, the individual development, the ontogeny of a ritualized ceremony follows approximately the path taken by its phylogeny. To be exact, it repeats the ontogeny which the same character took in the ancestral forms, as Carl Ernst von Baer rightly recognized. However, for our purpose the wider defi- nition suffices. The rites evolved from the redirected attack resemble its unritualized prototype far more in its first appear- ance than in its later form. In a newly paired cichlid male, when the intensity of the whole reaction is not too pronounced, it can clearly be seen that the male would like to ram his young mate but that at the last moment he is prevented by other motives from doing so, and that he now prefers to vent his anger on his neighbour. In the fully developed ceremony, the ‘symbol’ has become further removed from the symbolized, and its origin is veiled by the ‘theatrical’ effect of the whole reaction, as also by the fact that it is obviously performed for its own sake. Thus its function and symbolism become much more apparent than its origin. A more exact analysis is necessary in order to find out how many of the originally conflicting drives are still present in the individual case. A quarter of a century ago, when my friend Alfred Seitz and I first became acquainted with this rite, we soon understood the function of the ‘nest-relief ’ and ‘greeting’ ceremonies of cichlids, but for a long time we did not under- stand its phylogenetic origin.
However, in the first exactly examined species, the African jewel-fish, we were immediately struck by the resemblance between the gestures of threatening and of ‘greeting’. We soon learned to distinguish between them and to predict correctly whether the particular movements would lead to fighting or pair formation, but to our dismay we were unable to find out which were the salient points for our verdict. Only when we made a closer analysis of the precarious transitions between serious threatening of the mate and the appeasement ceremony did the difference become clear. In threatening the fish stops suddenly exactly beside the threatened opponent, particularly when it is excited enough to perform not only broadside display but also the sideways tail-beat. Conversely, in the appeasing ceremony he not only does not stop opposite the partner but he swims past her, emphatically exaggerating his forward movements, at the same time directing his broadside display and tail-beat towards her. The direction in which the fish presents its ceremony is strikingly different from that in which it sets itself in motion for attack. If before the ceremony it has been standing still in the water near the mate it always begins to swim forward resolutely before performing the broadside display and tail-beat. Thus it is very clearly ‘symbolized’ that the mate is not the object of his attack but that his goal is to be found somewhere else, farther away in the direction in which the fish is swimming.
The so-called functional change is a means often used by the two great constructors of evolution to put to new purposes remnants of an organization whose function has been out-stripped by the progress of evolution. With daring fantasy the constructors have, for example, made from a water-conducting gill slit an air- containing, sound-conducting hearing tube; from two bones of the jaw joint two little auditory bones; from a parietal eye an endocrine gland, the pineal body; from a reptile’s arm a bird’s wing, and so on. However, all these amazing metamorphoses seem tame in comparison with the ingenious feat of transform- ing, by the comparatively simple means of redirection and ritual- ization, a behaviour pattern which, not only in its prototype but even in its present form, is partly motivated by aggression into a means of appeasement and further into a love ceremony which forms a strong tie between those that participate in it. This means neither more nor less than converting the mutually repel- ling effect of aggression into its opposite. Like the performance of any other independent instinctive act, that of the ritual has become a need for the animal, in other words an end in itself. Unlike the autonomous instinct of aggression, out of which it arose, it cannot be indiscriminately discharged at any anonym- ous fellow-member of the species, but demands for its object the personally known partner. Thus it forms a bond between individuals.
We must consider what an apparently insoluble problem is here solved in the simplest, most elegant and complete manner: two furiously aggressive animals which in their appearance, colouring, and behaviour are to each other what the red rag (though only proverbially) is to the bull, must be made to agree within the narrowest space, at the nesting-place, that is at the very place which each regards as the centre of its territory, where intra-specific aggression is at its peak. And this, in itself difficult, task is made more difficult by the additional demand that intra-specific aggression must not be weakened in either of the partners. We know from Chapter 3 that even the slightest decrease in aggression towards the neighbouring fellow- member of the species must be paid for with loss of territory and, at the same time, of sources of food for the expected pro- geny. Under these circumstances, the species ‘cannot afford’, for the sake of preventing mate-fights, to resort to appeasement ceremonies such as submissive or infantile gestures whose pre-requisite is reduction of aggression. Ritualized redirection precludes not only this undesirable effect, but, moreover, makes use of the key stimuli proceeding from one mate to stimulate the other against the territorial neighbour. I consider this behaviour mechanism supremely ingenious, and much more chivalrous than the reverse analogous behaviour of the man who, angry with his employer during the day, discharges his pent-up irritation on his unfortunate wife in the evening.
In the great family tree of life, a particularly successful solu- tion is often found by the different branches independently of one another. Insects, fish, birds and bats have ‘discovered’ wings; squids, fish, ichthyosauri and whales the torpedo form. So it is not surprising that fight-preventing behaviour mechanisms based on ritualized redirection of attack occur in analogous development in many different animals.
There is, for example, the marvellous appeasement ceremony, generally known as the ‘dance’, of cranes, which, when the symbolism of its behaviour patterns is fully understood, tempts us to translate it into human language. A bird rears up before another one and unfolds its mighty wings, its beak pointing towards the other bird, its eyes fixed piercingly on him, the very image of ominous threatening; so far the appeasement gesture resembles the preparation for attack; but the next moment the bird turns this exhibition of his own frightfulness away from his opponent by a right-about turn; and now, still with widely spread wings, he presents to his partner his defenceless occiput, which, in the European crane and many other species, is decor- ated with a little ruby red cap. For seconds the ‘dancing’ bird remains in this position, expressing in easily understood sym- bolism that his threat of attack is emphatically not directed against his partner but, on the contrary, away from him, against the wicked world outside, thereby implying the motive of com- radely defence. Now the crane turns again towards his friend and repeats this demonstration of his size and strength, swiftly turn- ing round once more and performing emphatically a fake attack on any substitute object, preferably a near-by crane which is not a friend, or even on a harmless goose or on a piece of wood or stone which he seizes with his beak and throws three or four times into the air. The whole procedure says as clearly as human words, ‘I am big and threatening, but not towards you – towards the other, the other, the other.’
Less dramatic in its sign language but much more significant is the appeasement ceremony of Anatidae: ducks, and geese and swans, called by Oskar Heinroth the triumph ceremony. The special significance of this rite for our theme lies in the fact that it is seen in different stages of development and complexity in various representatives of the above-named bird group. From this gradation we can form a picture of how, in the course of phylogeny, an anger-diverting gesture of embarrassment has developed into a bond which shows a mysterious relationship to that other bond between human beings and which seems to us the strongest and most beautiful on earth.
In its most primitive form, seen in the so-called rabrab palaver of the mallard, threatening differs very little from greeting. The shade of difference in the orientation of the rabrab chatter when it is a matter of threatening on the one hand or of greeting on the other became clear to me only when I had learned to under- stand the principle of the redirected appeasement ceremony, through the more exact study of cichlids and geese, in which species it is easier to understand. Ducks face each other with beaks raised just above the horizontal and utter very quickly the bisyllabic call-note, rendered in the drake as ‘rabrab’, in the duck as the more nasal, ‘quangwang, quangwang’. As we already know, it is not only social inhibiting mechanisms which can cause a deviation from the threatening direction; fear of the object can have the same effect. For this reason two threatening drakes standing opposite each other and not quite daring to attack do not point their bills directly at each other while per- forming, with raised chins, their rabrab chatter. In the event of their really pointing them, it may be predicted that they will come to blows immediately, seizing each other by the breast feathers and striking with the shoulders of the wing.
When, however, the drake performs the rabrab palaver with his mate, particularly when he does so in answer to her inciting movements (page 61) the turning away of his head is much more marked, its angle increasing with the intensity of the whole rite. In extreme cases this may impel him, still palavering, to turn the back of his head to the female, a gesture correspond- ing formally to the appeasement ceremony of seagulls; in these, however, the ceremony has undoubtedly arisen in the manner described on pages 127–8, and definitely not from a redirected activity. This fact should act as a warning against too ready homologizing! From this head turning of the drake further ritualization has evolved, the gesture of presenting the back of the head, peculiar to many duck species, which plays a big part in courtship in mallards, teals, pintails and other dabbling ducks, also in the eiderduck group. The partners of a mallard pair cele- brate the ceremony of rabrab palaver with greatest intensity when they find each other again after a prolonged separation. The same applies to the appeasing gesture with broadside display and tail-beat as we know it in cichlid pairs. Because this cere- mony so often occurs at the reunion of previously separated partners, early observers interpreted it as ‘greeting’.
Although this interpretation may be true of certain specialized ceremonies of this kind, the frequency and intensity of these gestures at the reunion of partners signifies that originally they had another meaning: the blunting of all aggressive reactions, brought about by habituation to the partner, is partly nullified by even a short interruption of the habituated stimulus situation. Highly impressive examples of this phenomenon can be seen if we let a crowd of aggressive organisms, such as cichlids, Siamese fighting-fish, or Shama thrushes, grow up amicably together, thus ensuring a high degree of mutual habituation preventing the outbreak of hostilities; and if we then remove an individual for a short time, even for an hour, and afterwards return it to the others: on the slightest provocation aggressive behaviour surges up like water in delayed boiling.
Other very small changes in the overall situation can suddenly invalidate the habituation. In the summer of 1961 my old pair of Shama thrushes still tolerated a son from their first brood, which inhabited a cage in the same room as their nesting box, till long after the time when these birds normally chase their grown-up progeny out of the territory. But when I transferred his cage from the table to a bookcase, the parents began to attack him so intensively that they forgot to fly outside and get food for the babies that they were rearing at the time. Such sudden disinte- gration of the fighting inhibitions dependent on habituation is apparently a danger that threatens the bonds of partners every time they are separated even for a short time; obviously the strongly pronounced appeasement ceremony, seen at every reunion, is performed for no other reason than to preclude this danger. The fact that ‘greeting’ is the more excited and intense the longer the separation also agrees with this supposition.
Probably our human laughter in its original form was also an appeasement or greeting ceremony. Smiling and laughing in my opinion represent different intensities of the same behaviour pattern, that is, they respond with different thresholds to the same particular quality of excitation. In our nearest relations, the chimpanzee and the gorilla, there is unfortunately no greeting movement corresponding in form and function to laughter, but it is seen in many macaques which, as an appeasement gesture, bare their teeth and at intervals turn their heads to and fro, smacking their lips and laying back their ears. It is remarkable that many orientals smile in the same way when greeting, but the most interesting fact is that while smiling most intensely they turn their heads a little sideways so that the eyes do not look straight at the person being politely greeted, but past him. In a purely functional consideration of this ritual it is unimportant how much of its form is fixed by heredity and how much by the cultural tradition of politeness.
In any case it is tempting to interpret the greeting smile as an appeasing ceremony which, analogously to the triumph cere- mony of geese, has evolved by ritualization of redirected threat- ening. The friendly tooth-baring of very polite Japanese lends support to this theory. It is also supported by the fact that in genuinely emotional intensive greeting between two friends, the smile surprisingly becomes a loud laugh. On considering one’s own feelings it seems incongruous that, on meeting a friend after a long separation, the roar of laughter breaks forth unexpectedly from the depths of instinctive strata of our person- ality. This behaviour of two reunited human beings must inevit- ably remind an objective behaviour investigator of the triumph ceremony of greylag geese.
In many respects the eliciting situations are analogous. When several fairly primitive individuals, such as small boys, laugh together at one or several others not belonging to the same group, the activity, like that of other redirected appeasement ceremonies, contains quite a large measure of aggression direc- ted towards non-members of the group. Most jokes provoke laughter by building up a tension which is then suddenly and unexpectedly exploded. Something very similar may happen in the greeting ceremonies of many animals: dogs and geese, and probably other animals, break into intensive greeting when an unpleasantly tense conflict situation is suddenly relieved. The third analogy lies in the fact that laughter, like greeting, tends to create a bond. From self-observation I can safely assert that shared laughter not only directs aggression but also produces a feeling of social unity.
The simple prevention of fighting may be the original and, in many cases, the chief function of all the rites described above; however, even at the relatively low stage of development as seen in the rabrab palaver of the mallard, rites already have so much autonomy that they are aspired to for their own sake. When a mallard drake, constantly uttering his long-drawn monosyllabic call-note, ‘Raaaab-Raaaab’, seeks his mate and, having found her, works himself into a frenzy of rabrab palaver, raising his chin and presenting the back of his head, the observer cannot refrain from the subjective interpretation that he is delighted to have found her and that his diligent seeking was largely motivated by his longing to indulge in the greeting ceremony. In the more highly ritualized forms of the real triumph ceremony, such as are found in sheldrake and particularly in geese, this impression is even stronger, and we are tempted to omit the inverted commas in the use of the word, greeting.
In virtually all dabbling ducks, also in the common sheldrake which, in respect of the rabrab palaver is closely akin to dabbling ducks, this rite has a second function in the exercise of which only the male performs the appeasement ceremony while the female incites him. A subtle motivation analysis tells us that in this case the male, while directing his threatening gestures towards a neighbouring male of the same species, is, to a certain extent, also aggressive towards his own female, whereas she feels no aggression towards him, but genuinely does so towards the stranger. This rite, a combination of redirected threatening by the male and inciting by the female, is functionally analogous to the triumph ceremony in which both partners threaten past each other. In the European widgeon and the common sheldrake it has developed independently into a particularly beautiful rite. The Chiloe widgeon, on the other hand, has an equally highly differentiated ceremony, much more closely analogous to the triumph ceremony, since both mates threaten in redirection just as do true geese and most larger forms of sheldrake. The female of the Chiloe widgeon wears the male plumage with its glossy green head and light red-brown breast, a unique case among dabbling ducks. In the ruddy sheldrake, the Egyptian goose, and many related species, the female has a homologous inciting movement, but the male reacts to it less with a ritualized threatening past his wife than with a real, active attack on the neighbour marked by her as hostile. Once this enemy is overpowered, or when the fight has ended at least in a draw, then an elaborate triumph ceremony follows. In many species, for example in the Orinoco goose, the Andean goose and others, this ceremony not only produces some remarkable sound effects owing to the difference of the male and female voices, but it is also a very amusing spectacle thanks to the exaggerated miming of the gestures. My film of an Andean goose couple winning a decisive victory over my friend Niko Tinbergen is guaranteed to bring the house down. First the female, by a short feigned attack, urges her mate against the famous ethologist; and now, gradually working him- self up, the gander really attacks, thereby getting into such a fury and beating so angrily with his wings that it looks really con- vincing when he finally puts Niko to flight. Afterwards, Niko’s legs and forearms, with which he had warded off the gander, were black and blue from blows and pinches. The disappearance of the human enemy is followed by a virtually endless triumph ceremony which is extraordinarily funny in the exuberance of its all too human expression.
The Egyptian goose is more energetic than any other female of the sheldrake group in inciting her mate against all members of the species within reach and, in the absence of these, against birds of other species; much to the dismay of the keeper who is obliged to pinion his beautiful birds and to isolate them in pairs. The female Egyptian goose watches all the fights of her mate with the interest of a boxing referee but she never helps him, as greylag females and female cichlids do their mates; in fact, if he comes off the worse, she is always ready to go over with flying colours to the side of the winner.
Such behaviour must exercise a significant effect on sexual selection, by putting a premium on the greatest possible fighting power and bellicosity in the male. Here again a thought presents itself which engaged our attention at the end of Chapter 3. Quite probably the fighting urge of the Egyptian goose, which often seems insane to the observer, is the result of intra-specific selection and is of absolutely no survival value. This thought is disturbing because, as we shall see later, similar considerations have to be borne in mind concerning the phylogenetic development of the human aggressive drive.
The Egyptian goose belongs, further, to the few species in which the triumph cry can fail in its appeasing function. When two pairs of Egyptians, one pair on each side of a transparent but impenetrable fence, tease each other and work themselves up into a rage, it sometimes happens that suddenly, as though on command, the mates of each pair face each other and beat each other unmercifully. This behaviour can also be induced by put- ting a scapegoat of the same species into the enclosure of a pair and, when the fight is in full swing, removing it as unostenta- tiously as possible. Then the pair indulges in an ecstatic triumph ceremony which becomes wilder and wilder, differing less and less from unritualized threatening, till suddenly the loving part- ners have each other by the neck and are thrashing each other hard; this always ends in the victory of the male since he is appreciably bigger and stronger than the female. However, in the absence of a ‘bad neighbour’, the damming of aggression in Egyptian geese never leads, as far as I know, to mate-murder in the way I have described it in cichlids.
However, in the Egyptian goose and in most of the sheldrake species, the main significance of the triumph ceremony lies in its functions as a lightning conductor. It is used particularly when thunderstorms threaten, that is, when both the inner mood of the animals and the external situation strongly elicit intra- specific aggression. Although the triumph ceremony, particu- larly in the common sheldrake, consists of highly differentiated, choreographically exaggerated motor patterns, it is here not dis- sociated from the original drives underlying the conflict, as is the case in the movement pattern of the less highly developed ‘greeting’ of many dabbling ducks described on pages 57–8. The triumph ceremony in sheldrakes evidently still derives its ener- gies largely from the primal drives from whose conflict the redirected movement first developed, and it is still dependent on the simultaneous rousing of aggression and of the factors acting against it. In these species the ceremony is subject to strong seasonal fluctuations; it is most intensive during the repro- ductive season, fades during the rest period and is naturally non-existent in young sexually immature birds.
All this is entirely different in the greylag and all true geese: first, their triumph rite is no longer the concern of the mated partners alone, but has become a bond embracing the whole family and indeed whole groups of individuals. The ceremony has become entirely independent of sexual drives; it is per- formed throughout the year, and even the tiny goslings take part in it.
The movement sequence is longer and more complicated than in all the hitherto described appeasing ceremonies. While in cichlids, and also in many species of sheldrake, the aggression diverted from the partner by the greeting ceremony leads to a subsequent attack on the hostile neighbour, in geese this attack precedes the affectionate greeting in a ritualized sequence of movements. In other words, it is characteristic of the triumph cry that one partner, usually the strongest member of the group, in pairs always the gander, proceeds to attack a real or apparent enemy, fights him, and then, after a more or less convincing victory returns, greeting loudly, to his family. From this typical case, reproduced here in a diagram by Helga Fischer, the triumph ceremony derives its name.
The first part of the triumph ceremony, the attack performed with head and neck pointing obliquely forward and upward, and accompanied by a loud, raucously trumpeting fanfare, is called rolling. (A in Fig. 4 on page 97 and in Fig. 5). The second part, the return to the partner, with the neck stretched forward low along the ground, the head tilted upwards, accompanied by low but rather passionate chatter, was termed cackling by Helga Fischer. The attitude of cackling closely resembles that of serious attack (compare 6 in Fig. 5 with 1 and 2 in the same figure and with E in Fig. 4), the only difference being that the neck and head do not point at the object of the gesture, as in threatening, but distinctly past it.
Motivation analysis, proceeding along the lines sketched in Chapter 6, shows rolling to be a behaviour pattern of very complicated and conflicting motivation. The form of the move- ment shows a mixture of elements, including aggression, fear and social contact. The same is true of the accompanying unique production of sounds. In order to elicit ‘rolling’, two entirely different sets of stimuli must be simultaneously present: those represented by the presence of a friendly cackling partner as well as those emanating from a hostile stranger. In many ways the situation activating the rolling attack is comparable to the one releasing the critical response which we learned about on pages 31–2. The gander, being closely tied to the spot where his mate or his young are to be found, is prevented from fleeing as effec- tively as the proverbially cornered rat. As with the rat, his all-out assault is the more furious and desperate, the more frightening to the antagonist at whom it is launched. This is borne out by the fact that young, newly mated ganders who have not yet acquired social status are more furious and persistent in their rolling attacks than older birds possessing an assured position in the ranking order of the flock.
Unlike rolling, the second part of the triumph ceremony, cackling, is dependent on a single motivation, as the thorough analysis made by Dr Fischer has proved beyond reasonable doubt. The expression movement with which the crackling goose turns towards the partner closely resembles the threaten- ing gesture depicted in Figure 4 E, and it is indeed only distinguishable from it by the slight deviation caused by the ritualized redirection already mentioned. Viewed in profile this is quite imperceptible and neither man nor goose can tell whether a goose approaching another in this attitude intends to cackle with it or to launch an attack against it. In spring, when the family ties slacken and young ganders go courting, it may easily happen that one brother still continues to perform a family triumph rite with another, while he is already trying to make a strange young female an offer of pairing. This consists not in copulatory proposals but in attacks on strange geese which he performs and then hurries back, greeting, to the female of his choice. If his brother sees this from one side, he believes that the suitor wants to attack the young female, and since male mem- bers of a triumph-rite group defend each other valiantly, he rushes furiously at his brother’s prospective bride and, having no tender feelings towards her for himself, thrashes her in a way which would correspond to the expression movements of his brother if he were threatening and not greeting. When the female flees in terror her suitor finds himself in a situation of extreme embarrassment. This is not anthropomorphizing, since the objective physiological basis of every embarrassment is the conflict between opposing impulses; and the young gander is undoubtedly in just such a situation: the urge to defend the courted female is tremendously strong in a greylag gander, but equally strong is the inhibition against attacking his brother who is still his fellow in the fraternal triumph ceremony. We shall later see from some impressive examples how insurmountable this inhibition is.
Comparative study of other ducks and geese leaves no doubt that cackling has evolved, by way of ritualization of a redirected activity, from threatening gestures, in a manner exactly analo- gous to the origin of the appeasement gestures in cichlids dis- cussed on page 162. Yet in its present form the cackling of greylag geese contains no aggressive motivation. Nor indeed does the triumph ceremony still function as an appeasement ceremony in this species. Only in a quickly traversed stage in individual development can we demonstrate, in the greeting pat- tern, the primal drives underlying the reorientation as well as its appeasing function. Otherwise the ontogenetic development of the triumph ceremony is obviously not a recapitulation of its evolution. Even before a gosling can stand, walk, or eat, it is perfectly able to perform the motor pattern of stretching the neck forward, simultaneously uttering a falsetto cackling. The call is at first bisyllabic, exactly like the mallard’s ‘rabrab’ and the corresponding duckling sound. A few hours later it becomes a polysyllabic ‘veeveevee’ whose rhythm exactly corresponds with the greeting chatter of adult geese. The stretching forward of the neck and the vee sounds are undoubtedly the preliminary stage from which, in the growing goose, the expression movements of threatening, as well as the essential second phase of the tri- umph ceremony, develop. We know from comparative research that, in the course of phylogeny, greeting has evolved from threatening by way of redirection and ritualization. But in indi- vidual development the formally similar gesture at first has the meaning of greeting. When the gosling has accomplished the difficult and by no means undangerous task of hatching and is lying there, a little wet bundle of misery with drooping out- stretched neck, there is one prompt reaction that can with cer- tainty be elicited from it: if one bends over it and utters a few sounds in an approximately goosey tone of voice, it lifts its little head, wobbly and uncertain, stretches its neck, and greets. Before it is able to do anything else the tiny wild goose greets its social surroundings!
In their meaning as an expression movement, as also in respect of the eliciting situation, the neck stretching and whis- pering of the little greylag resemble the greeting and not the threatening of the adult. It is, however, remarkable that, in its form, this behaviour pattern is at first indistinguishable from threatening, since the characteristic sideways deviation of the outstretched neck from the direction of the partner is missing in very small goslings. It is only when they are a few weeks old, and contour feathers of the juvenile plumage are visible amongst the down, that the behaviour alters. The young birds begin to be noticeably more aggressive towards birds of the same age belonging to other families, and, with outstretched necks and whispering, they walk up to them and attempt to bite them. But since, in such quarrels between the young birds of two families, threatening and greeting gestures are exactly the same, misunderstandings often arise and brother may bite brother. In this particular situation, one sees for the first time in ontogeny the ritualized redirection of the greeting movement: the gosling bitten by his brother or sister does not bite back but breaks into intensive whispering and neck stretching, directing this markedly past the other gosling at a more obtuse angle than is the case later on in the fully matured ceremony. The aggression-inhibiting effect of these gestures becomes particu- larly evident; the still aggressive brother or sister abandons the attitude at once and indulges in its turn in a greeting plainly directed past its object. The phase of development in which the triumph rite reveals such a noticeably appeasing function lasts only a few days; ritualized redirection suddenly sets in and, except in certain rare cases, henceforth prevents misunderstandings.
The function of eliminating these rather rare misunderstand- ings between siblings is all that remains, in ontogeny, of the original appeasing function of the triumph ceremony. In its mature state, the behaviour pattern, though still retaining the external form of redirected threat, is not activated by aggression, but by the independent motivation of the greeting ceremony itself, except under abnormal circumstances of which I shall speak later. All the aggression detectable in the triumph rite by a thorough motivation analysis is discharged during its first, ‘roll- ing’ phase, and in the direction of the hostile stranger. ‘Rolling’ continues for a few seconds as the gander, whether victorious or not, turns away from his opponent: it ceases abruptly as he approaches his mate and, as the two meet, passionate cackling ensues with heads held close together. Figure 5 represents the motor patterns of this procedure.
The observer familiar with the respective meanings of rolling and cackling cannot help feeling that the passion of togetherness which finds its voice in this cackling is heightened by a phe- nomenon of contrast, by that which physiologists call a ‘rebound effect’. Aggression having been discharged at the hos- tile neighbour, tenderness towards the mate and children wells up unchecked. Conversely, the nearness of the loved ones enhances the intensity of aggression towards the intruding stranger. The family which has to be defended acts in some way like a movable territory, an interesting fact to which we shall return later on. Conversely, the presence of aggression-eliciting outsiders considerably enhances the readiness to cackle lovingly with the partner or partners in the triumph ceremony.
There is one impressive special case of the triumph ceremony in which the dual, mutually enhancing function of rolling and cackling becomes particularly apparent, although the two parts of the ceremony are not clearly separated in time, but, in a manner of speaking, go off simultaneously. In autumn and win- ter when many families of geese congregate in large migratory flocks it is not the gander alone who acts as defender of the family, rushing out to attack and to return victorious, but all members of the group united by a shared triumph ceremony set forth together to drive away another family group. Every goose is obviously torn between the conflicting urges to roll in the direc- tion of the enemy and to cackle with the next member of the family; one can actually see the necks swinging to and fro between the two alternative directions. Finally, all the members of the family stand roughly parallel to each other, pointing threatening necks at the hostile group, while simultaneously try- ing to keep their heads as closely together as possible, cheek by cheek, as postulated by the rite of cackling. The result is the formation of a closed wedge-shaped phalanx of converging necks. Viewed from the front this presents a spectacle which, together with the mixed rolling and cackling accompanying it, intimidates the enemy the more effectively, the greater the num- ber of group members participating in this ‘ceremony of con- verging necks’, as I termed it many years ago. Helga Fischer calls it, briefly and graphically, the ‘roll-cackle’.
Discriminative aggression towards strangers and the bond between the members of a group enhance each other. The opposition of ‘we’ and ‘they’ can unite some widely contrasting units. Confronted with present-day China, the United States and the Soviet Union occasionally seem to feel as ‘we’. The same phenomenon, which incidentally has some of the earmarks of war, can be studied in the roll-cackle ceremony of greylag geese. In autumn and winter it occasionally happens that flocks of geese, consisting of several families, come back from the breed- ing colonies which we settled some miles away on neighbouring lakes, when the number of birds on our Ess See had become excessive. Faced with these utter strangers, the otherwise mutu- ally hostile families of geese on our lake unite in one collective phalanx of converging necks, and attempt to drive away the intruders who, in turn, form another phalanx and usually stand their ground, provided they are numerous enough.
In all these cases the triumph rite performs a function subtly different from that of the primal appeasing ceremony from which it evolved. Though the external form of redirected threat is still all there in the stretching of the neck past the cackling partner, the latter has long ceased to arouse any aggression which needs to be redirected or which can be exploited to increase the intensity of attack against the neighbour, as in the case of the nest-relief ceremony of cichlids (page 164). Hence the temporal sequence of the redirected movement and the attack against the hostile stranger is inverted: in cichlids the attack follows upon the redirected movement, in geese it pre- cedes it. Yet the whole ceremony has a similar effect on the behaviour of the individuals participating in it. It still holds them together and enables them to stand by each other against a hos- tile world. The principle of the bond, formed by having some- thing in common which has to be defended against outsiders, remains the same, from cichlids defending a common territory or brood, right up to scientists defending a common opinion and – most dangerous of all – the fanatics defending a common ideology. In all these cases aggression is necessary to enhance the bond. What is so new and indeed hope-inspiring about the tri- umph ceremony is that the bond it forms is so largely independ- ent of aggression. Geese held together by a shared triumph ceremony stay together, irrespective of whether or not they have young or territory to defend, or are surrounded by hostile fellow-members of the species or are all on their own. They perform their beautiful rite just as intensely on meeting again after a long separation as they would after the most glorious victory in battle.
However, the great marvel of the triumph ceremony and one that inspires even the most objective observer with human sym- pathy is the enduring and personal nature of the bond by which it unites the individuals participating in it.
The group embraced by the triumph ceremony is remarkably exclusive. The newly hatched bird enjoys the birthright of group membership and is accepted ‘unquestioningly’ even when it is not a goose but an experimentally introduced changeling, such as a Muscovy duck. After only a few days the parents have learnt to know their children and the children their parents, and from now on they are not prepared to perform the triumph rite with any other geese.
If one makes the rather cruel experiment of transplanting a gosling into a strange family, it will be found that the later it is removed from its original family the more difficulty the poor baby will have in finding acceptance by the strangers’ triumph community. The baby is afraid of the strangers, and the more fear it shows the more they are likely to attack it.
It is an unforgettable experience to hand-rear a gosling from the moment of its hatching. One cannot help feeling moved by its childlike trust when it stretches forward its tiny neck and whispers its little falsetto greeting to the first living being that approaches it, ‘taking it for granted’ that this must be one of its parents.
Only in one other situation does a greylag ever offer its tri- umph rite, and with it permanent love and friendship, to a com- plete stranger: that is when a young male suddenly falls in love (without inverted commas!) with a strange young female. These first proposals take place at a time when last year’s young birds are obliged to leave their parents who are now getting ready for the new brood. At this moment family bonds necessarily loosen but they are never completely broken.
With geese, much more so than in the duck species already discussed, the triumph rite is bound up with personal recogni- tion of the partner. Ducks, too, palaver only with acquaintances, but the bond knit by this ceremony between the participating individuals is not so firm, nor is the group membership so dif- ficult to acquire as in geese. An individual goose which has recently flown into a colony, or one which has been introduced into a group by the owner, may literally take years before it is accepted into one of the goose-groups bound by the triumph rite.
The stranger may more easily acquire a partner by suddenly falling in love, and deviously achieve membership of a larger triumph-rite group by founding a family. Apart from the special cases in which a goose has fallen in love and found its love returned, or has been born into the family group, the triumph ceremony is the more intensive and the bond uniting the part- ners the firmer, the longer the animals have known each other. All other things being equal, one can say that the strength of the triumph-rite bond is proportional to the duration of the friend- ship of the partners, or one might even say that a triumph rite always develops when companionship between two or more geese has lasted a sufficiently long time.
In the early spring, when the older goose pairs are concerned with breeding, and the many young one- and two-year-old geese with love, numerous unpaired geese of different ages are always left over as erotically unemployed wallflowers, and these then join together in groups of varying sizes. We call these groups the non-breeders, though the expression is not an accur- ate one since the many young but firmly paired couples have not yet begun to breed either. In such non-breeding groups firm triumph-rite bonds can develop which have nothing whatever to do with sexuality. Also if two lonely geese are dependent on each other’s company a non-breeding association between a male and a female may occur. This actually happened at our station, when an old widowed goose returned from our branch settlement on the Ammersee and joined a recently widowed gander in Seewiesen. I believed that pair formation was immi- nent, but Helga Fischer thought from the beginning that it was only a typical non-breeding triumph rite such as sometimes unites an adult male with an adult female. Contrary to popular opinion, there are true friendships between male and female which have nothing to do with love, though naturally love may spring from them. If wild-goose breeders want to pair two birds which fail to respond to each other, they often transfer them together to another zoo or water-fowl collection where, as new- comers, they are so unpopular that they are dependent on each other for company. In this way, one can force the formation of a non-breeding triumph ceremony, in the hope that pair forma- tion will ensue. However, all too often I have found that such forced ties soon dissolve when the pair returns to its old environment.
The relation between the triumph-rite and sexuality, the true copulatory drive, is not easy to understand and in any case it is only a loose one, for everything purely sexual plays a very sub- ordinate role in the life of the wild goose. The bond that holds a goose pair together for life is the triumph ceremony and not the sexual relations between mates. The presence of a strong triumph-rite bond between two individuals ‘paves the way’, that is furthers to a certain extent the development of sexual rela- tions. When two geese – or two ganders – have been united for a long time by this ceremony, they usually try to copulate in the end. But conversely, the copulatory relations that often occur in year-old, sexually immature young birds do not appear to be favourable for the development of a triumph-rite bond. Young geese can often be seen making copulatory movements but these are no forecast of a later pairing. On the other hand, the least sign that a triumph-cry proposal from a young gander is finding response in the female means that in all probability the two will become a pair. Such tender relations in which copulatory reactions play no part appear to dissolve completely in summer and autumn, but in the follow- ing spring when the young geese start courting seriously, they often return to their young love of the previous year. The loose and rather one-sided relations between the triumph rite and copulation in geese have far-reaching analogies with those between falling in love and physical sexual reaction patterns in man. The ‘purest’ love leads by way of the greatest tenderness to a physical approach which, however, is in no way the essential part of this bond; and conversely, those stimulus situations and partners which release the strongest copulatory drives are cer- tainly not unconditionally the ones that produce the most intense falling in love. In the greylag goose the two function cycles can dissociate themselves as completely from each other and make themselves as independent as they can in man, though they undoubtedly belong together ‘normally’ and must relate to one and the same partner if they are to fulfill their survival value.
The concept ‘normal’ is one of the most difficult things to define in the whole of biology but at the same time it is unfortunately as indispensable as its counterpart, the concept ‘pathological’. My friend Bernhard Hellmann, when confronted with something particularly bizarre and unaccountable in the structure or behaviour of an animal, used to ask the apparently naïve question, ‘Is this how the constructor meant it to be?’ In fact, the only way to assess ‘normal’ structure and function is by demonstrating that these are the ones which, under selection pressure of their survival value, have evolved in this and in no other form. Unfortunately this definition leaves out of consider- ation everything which has become so, and not otherwise, by pure chance, though such chance products of evolution need not necessarily fall into the category of the pathological. However, by normal we understand not the average taken from all the single cases observed, but rather the type constructed by evolution, which for obvious reasons is seldom to be found in a pure form; nevertheless we need this purely ideal conception of a type in order to be able to conceive the deviations from it. The zoology textbook cannot do more than describe a perfectly intact ideal butterfly as the representative of its species, a butterfly that never exists exactly in this form, because, of all the specimens found in collections, every one is in some way malformed or damaged.
We are equally unable to assess the ideal construction of ‘normal’ behaviour in the greylag goose or in any other species, a behaviour which would occur only if absolutely no interfer- ence had worked on the animal and which exists no more than does the ideal type of butterfly. People of insight see the ideal type of a structure or behaviour, that is, they are able to separate the essentials of type from the background of little accidental imperfections. When my teacher, Oskar Heinroth, described in his now classic work on Anatidae (1905), the lifelong, un- conditional marital fidelity of the greylag goose as its ‘normal’ behaviour, he had correctly abstracted the ideal, interference-free type, though he could never have observed it in reality, since the life of a goose may last half a century and its marriage only two years less. Nevertheless his assertion is justified and the type described by him is as useful as a norm deduced from the aver- age of many single cases would be useless. Shortly before writing this chapter I was working with Helga Fischer through her goose records, and in spite of what I have just said I evidently showed disappointment that Heinroth’s type of perfect goose marriage, faithful unto death, was so rarely to be found among our many geese. Whereupon Helga, exasperated by my disap- pointment, made the immortal remark, ‘What do you expect? After all, geese are only human!’
In wild geese – and this has also been demonstrated in free- living ones – there are very wide divergences from the norm of marital behaviour; and, of these, one which frequently occurs is of special interest because, though strictly condemned in some human cultures, in geese, surprisingly, it is not harmful to sur- vival; I mean the bond between two males. There are no obvious qualitative differences either in appearance or behaviour be- tween the two sexes; only one ceremony in pair formation, the so-called angle-neck, is essentially different in the two sexes and presupposes that the prospective partners are unacquainted before pairing and therefore a little afraid of each other. If this rite is skipped a gander may possibly make his triumph-rite proposal to another male instead of to a female. This happens frequently, and not only owing to close confinement, when all the geese concerned know each other too well. At my former research station in Buldern, Westphalia, where we were obliged to keep our geese on a relatively small pond, this happened so often that for a long time we thought that in the pair formation of greylags heterosexual partners only came together by trial and error. It was only later that we discovered the function of the angle-neck ceremony, but this need not be discussed here.
If such a young gander makes his triumph-rite proposal to another male and is accepted, they each find, in respect of this all important ceremony, a far better partner and companion than they would have done in a female. Since intra-specific aggression is far stronger in ganders than in geese, the inclination to per- form the triumph ceremony is also stronger and the two friends stimulate each other to acts of courage. No pair of opposite sex can complete with them; thus such gander pairs always attain very high, if not the highest places in the ranking order of the colony. They keep together for life just as faithfully as a pair of heterosexual individuals. When we separated our oldest gander pair, Max and Kopfschlitz, and sent Max to our branch colony on the Ampersee near Fürstenfeldbruck, after a year of mourning both ganders paired with female geese and bred successfully, but when we fetched Max back – without his wife and children whom we could not catch – Kopfschlitz immediately deserted his family and returned to him. Kopfschlitz’s wife and sons seemed to understand the situation and they made furious but unsuccessful attempts to drive Max away. At the time of writing the two ganders are still united and Kopfschlitz’s abandoned wife waddles slowly after them at a measured distance.
Our concepts of ‘homosexuality’ are very wide and very ill defined. The effeminate painted youth in the bar and the hero of a Greek epic are both considered homosexual, although the behaviour of the former comes close to that of the opposite sex, whereas that of the latter is the behaviour of the true superman, and it is only in his choice of a sexual partner that he deviates from the normal. Our ‘homosexual’ ganders come under the second category and their erring is far more ‘forgivable’ than that of Achilles and Patroclus because male and female differ much less in geese than in humans. Moreover, their behaviour is far less ‘animal’ than that of most human homosexuals, for they seldom if ever copulate or perform substitute actions. In spring, they can be seen celebrating with graceful neck-dipping the ceremony of pre-copulatory display. The poet Hölderlin put this behaviour, in swans, into verse. If after the ritual the ganders want to copulate, each tries to mount the other and neither thinks of laying himself flat on the water, after the manner of the female. Thus frustrated they may get angry with each other, but just as frequently they give up their attempt with no signs of emotion or disappointment. In a manner of speaking, each takes the other for a female, but the fact that ‘she’ is a little frigid and simply will not be mated scarcely interferes with the great love. With the advance of spring the ganders gradually learn that they cannot copulate and they no longer attempt to mount each other, but during the winter they forget their inability and next spring with fresh hope, they attempt to mate again.
Often, but not always, the mating drive of two ganders linked by the triumph rite finds outlet in another direction: probably their social superiority, attained by their united strength, has a particularly strong attraction for unpaired females; at all events, a goose will soon be found to follow the two heroes at a respectful distance, since, as subsequent events show, she has fallen in love with one of them. This young female at first stands or swims beside them, but when the ganders make their unsuccessful attempts at copulation she soon cunningly learns to push herself between them in an attitude of readiness at the critical moment when the male of her choice is trying to mount the other. She always offers herself to the same gander, which then regularly mates her but immediately afterwards turns to his friend and addresses the ceremony of post-copulatory display to him. ‘It was really you I was thinking of all the time!’ The second gander often takes part in the epilogue. In one particular recorded case the goose did not follow the two ganders every- where, but waited in a certain corner of the pond for her lover till midday, when geese are particularly ready to copulate; he swam quickly towards her, but immediately after mating her he flew straight back across the pond to his friend – a most unchivalrous act towards the female. But she never seemed to take offence.
In the gander such a loveless copulatory relationship with a female may gradually become a habit, while in the goose con- cerned there is always a latent readiness to join in his triumph ceremony. The longer they know each other the smaller becomes the distance between the goose and the two ganders, and gradually the second male, too, becomes used to her pres- ence. Very gradually she begins to join in the triumph ceremony of the two friends, first shyly and later with increasing con- fidence, until the ganders are quite used to her participation. So the goose, by the devious way of long, long acquaintance, changes from the status of a more or less unwanted appendage of one of the ganders to an equal member of the triumph-rite community. This long procedure may be shortened if the goose, who at first receives no help from anybody in the defence of a nest territory, manages nevertheless to acquire a nesting-place for herself and to breed. Then the two ganders may discover her and adopt her, either during incubation or after the hatching of the young. In reality they are adopting the brood, and they merely tolerate the fact that the mother joins in when they perform their triumph rite with the adopted children, who are of course the offspring of one of the two ganders. Standing watch over the nest and guiding the children are, as Heinroth has written, the climax in the life of a gander and are evidently charged with more feeling and emotion than pre-copulatory display and copu- lation; as a result they build a better bridge than copulation for a closer acquaintance of the individuals and the formation of a shared triumph ceremony.
Finally, by whichever of these different means it may be, after some years a real triangular marriage always results; the second gander also begins to mate the goose and all three birds enact the pre-copulatory and post-copulatory displays together. The most remarkable thing about such triangular marriages, of which we were able to observe a large number, is their biological success: they are always at the top of the ranking order of their colony, they are never driven out of their nesting territory and they raise, year by year, a considerable number of goslings. Thus one can- not regard the ‘homosexual’ triumph bond of two ganders as something pathological, the less so since it also occurs in wild geese in the natural state. Peter Scott observed in wild pink- footed geese in Iceland a considerable percentage of families consisting of two males and a female. The biological advantage of double defence by the fathers was even more evident there than in our local geese, which are comparatively protected against predators.
I have described how a new member can be received into the exclusive circle of a triumph community by way of long habituation, but it still remains for me to set forth how such a bond may arise explosively, almost before one has realized it, joining two individuals together for life. We say then, without inverted commas, that the two have fallen in love. The expression aptly describes the suddenness of the process.
The overt behaviour of females, and also of very young males, is not as conspicuously changed by their falling in love as is that of adult ganders. Not that the consequences are less momentous for them, quite the contrary; but all their actions are restrained by a natural modest shyness that is very appealing. Fully matured ganders advertise their new love by all the means at their dis- posal and it is really quite amazing what changes can be wrought in the outer appearance of a bird lacking special organs of dis- play. A fish can make its colours glow in sudden iridescence, it can unfold imposing fins, a peacock can raise and rustle his wonderful tail coverts, a man can dress up in his best clothes in order to appear as different as possible from his common every- day self. A gander can do none of these things and yet it has happened to me that I simply failed to recognize a well-known individual after he had suddenly fallen in love. The tension of all muscles is increased, which gives the bird a curious stance of pride and alertness and changes the contours of his body con- siderably. Every single moment, walking, swimming and flying, even preening or turning the head, is performed with an exces- sive expenditure of energy. Taking wing, a procedure which otherwise requires resolution and effort, comes as easily to a gander in love as to a humming-bird; he will fly even over very short distances which are really not worth the effort of taking off and landing again, and which every goose in its right mind would cover walking or swimming; he enjoys sudden acceler- ation and deceleration rather like a boy on a motorcycle. He particularly enjoys flying swiftly towards his bride, putting on the brakes at the latest possible moment and landing in a flurry of beating wings right in front of her, to deliver a triumph ceremony. Most of all he enjoys bullying and beating up other ganders while his lady is looking.
A young female that has fallen in love never tries to force her company on the object of her passion. She never follows him directly when he walks away; she merely turns up, as if by chance, in places where she knows he can often be found. If the gander does indeed court her, she does not react, for a consider- able time, by attitude or gesture. It is only the play of her eyes which tells the male how his courtship is received. Though she never looks directly at him and pretends instead to be looking at something else, she still watches his antics with the greatest interest. As she tries to do this without noticeably turning her head, she has to squint at him out of the corner of her eyes just like a girl flirting.
As with human beings, Cupid’s dart occasionally chances to hit one individual only. According to our records this happens to males more frequently than to females. In this, however, they could easily be wrong, owing to the fact mentioned above that young females are much more restrained in the expression of their love, so that their secret passion is easily overlooked. In males, a one-sided love quite frequently achieves a happy end- ing, even if the gander does not for a long time find the desired response. The male is able to force his attention on the female, to follow her around pertinaciously, and, above all, to spoil the chances of all rivals he is capable of vanquishing. A goose finds it difficult to love a male who is too patently afraid of another, so a gander, provided he persists long enough in his advances, usu- ally succeeds in getting the female so accustomed to his constant offers of a triumph ceremony that she finally joins in.
Permanently unrequited unhappy love is the fate of those who become attached to individuals whose affections are already absorbed in a happy mating. Ganders, in this case, very soon desist from their unsuccessful courtship; at least I have never known one to pursue a well-mated female for years. The record of a very tame hand-reared female, on the other hand, shows that her faithful love for a happily mated gander persisted for more than four years. She never openly followed him and his family, she always ‘just happened’ to be where he was. Every year she proved her own fidelity and, incidentally, that of the gander to his female, by laying an infertile clutch of eggs.
Fidelity over the joint performance of the triumph ceremony and fidelity over copulation are correlated to each other in a peculiar way which is slightly different in males and females. In the ideal ‘normal’ case, in which everything proceeds without disturbance, that is to say when two handsome and healthy geese are betrothed in the first, or at the latest in the second year of their life, when neither of the two kills itself by flying against a high-tension cable, nor gets lost in a fog, nor is eaten by a fox, nor is infected with nematodes, etc., etc., both male and female remain absolutely faithful to each other for ever after, both in respect of the triumph ceremony and of copulation. If a cruel fate sunders the bond of love at an early stage, both gander and goose are able to develop a new triumph ceremony with another partner; the sooner the separation from the first mate takes place the easier it is. Except for cases in which this happens at the very beginning of an attachment, the loss of his first love has a queer permanent influence on the behaviour of a gander: he is not as faithful to his new wife in regard to copulation as he would be if he had married the ‘first woman in his life’. In respect of the triumph ceremony his behaviour is not at all disturbed; his responses concerning the defence of the nest and the family are in no way impaired; he is a model husband and father – except that he will copulate, whenever opportunity offers, with strange females. Funnily enough, he is the more prone to such lapses, the farther he happens to be away from his wife, or from the nest while she is incubating. If a strange female comes near his nest- ing site, he will drive her away quite furiously, but he is ready to copulate with her if he meets her in some other place. The anthropomorphic observer tends to interpret this type of behaviour as an attempt on the part of the gander to keep his affairs secret from his wife. This, of course, greatly over-rates the bird’s mental powers. The real explanation is that, near his nest, he reacts to the strange female with territorial defence just as he would to any other trespassing goose which was not a member of his family. Away from his territory, on the other hand, his defence responses do not suppress the sexual one which the stranger elicits on neutral ground. A gander may have affairs of long duration, regularly meeting a female other than his wife in a ‘secret’ place and copulating with her. However, she is his partner only in copulation he never accompanies her when she is walking and he never gives even the slightest hint of a triumph ceremony in her presence. In this respect he remains absolutely faithful to his wife. Nor does he guard the strange female’s nest; should she happen to be successful in acquiring a nest site and in rearing a family, she must do so unaided by the gander. He does not love her in the least.
The strange female, for her part, is indeed in love with the gander; she attempts to stay near him in the restrained modest way already described, and she would at once accept his offer of a triumph ceremony, should he make one. In the female greylag goose, the urge to copulate and the urge to give the triumph ceremony cannot be dissociated and discharged with two separ- ate objects as so often happens in ganders. Also, the female goose finds it much more difficult than the male to develop a triumph ceremony with a new partner after having lost the old one. This is particularly the case with geese that have been widowed for the first time. The more often they have lost their mate or have been left by him – which also happens on occasion – the easier they find it to form a new triumph ceremony. However, the more often such a new bond is formed, the weaker and less durable it becomes. A goose who, through no fault of her own, has become widowed or divorced a number of times, shows a type of sexual behaviour vastly different from that of a goose mating for the first time. Being sexually much more active and not inhibited by the ‘maidenly restraint’ so characteristic of vir- gin geese, she is equally ready to enter a new triumph ceremony relationship and to copulate. Such a goose can become a real femme fatale. She actively provokes the courtship of a young gan- der offering her a permanent triumph ceremony, only to make him deeply unhappy a few weeks later by leaving him for a new lover. The record of the marriages contracted by our oldest grey- lag, Ada, exceeds that of a film actress and differs from it by the quite untypical end: in the ninth year of her life she found a grande passion in the person of a hitherto unmated gander of nearly her own age and remained faithful to him for the rest of her life. She raised a brood every year and died in 1963 from being egg-bound. Her life history will be told in another book.
The longer a pair has been happily mated and the nearer the history of their marriage comes to the ideal case described above, the more difficult it becomes for a widowed bird to form a new triumph ceremony. As I have shown, it is harder for the female than for the male. Heinroth recorded some cases in which widowed female geese never mated again and stayed sexually inactive for the rest of their lives. We never observed a similar fidelity in ganders. One bird, widowed late in life, ‘mourned’ for exactly one year, then started having copulatory affairs with a considerable number of unmated females and finally achieved a new triumph ceremony bond by the indirect procedure described on page 192. There is one exceptional case in which a female goose who had been well mated and had led an exemplary married life for some years, on the loss of her husband immediately entered a new triumph ceremony with another gander and lived happily with him for ever after. Our explanation that something must have been wrong with the first marriage sounds too much like begging the question.
Such exceptions, however, are so extremely rare that in order to convey the correct idea of the general durability and strength of the bond by which the triumph ceremony embraces the mates of a pair and, indeed, all the members of a family, I should perhaps have done better not to mention them. Not only in the ideal case of undisturbed pair formation, but on the average of all cases recorded, the triumph ceremony constitutes the most important structural element on which the social life of geese is built up. It is, so to speak, the leitmotif of goose life. As a slight undertone, it is present in all their daily activities. Its lowest intensity, the ordinary low cackling, so aptly translated by Selma Lagerlof by the words ‘here I am, where are you?’, can be heard almost permanently at short intervals while they are grazing or walking slowly; it swells up when two slightly hostile families come near each other; it is silent only when they are seriously alarmed, when they are fleeing or when they are covering great distances on the wing. The moment, however, that whatever occupation interrupts or prevents the continuous communing of the partners is happily past, the greeting ceremony breaks out again, the louder and more intensely the longer it has been suppressed. On the reunion of partners that have been separated for an appreciable time, say for a few hours, the full-blown ceremony, in its highest intensity, is triumphantly performed.
It would seem that the partners to a triumph-ceremony group have to reassure each other all day long and at every opportunity that they do indeed belong together, forming an independent social entity. In reality the relationship of cause and effect is the other way round. The truimph ceremony is not caused by love and friendship between certain individuals, it is not ‘the expres- sion of’ these feelings, quite on the contrary, the ceremony itself is instrumental in keeping the group members together.
I have already explained that all instinctive motor patterns possess their own spontaneity, their own action-specific produc- tion of endogenous stimulation whose quantity is quite exactly calculated to meet the demand which is to be expected in the organism’s normal environment. The more frequently a certain motor pattern is normally used, the greater its ‘supply’. Mice must gnaw a lot, hens must peck a lot and squirrels jump a lot under natural conditions, and thus it is not immediately appar- ent that this ‘must’ comes more from an internal urge than from external releasing stimulation. If such stimulation is withheld experimentally, even for a short time, it becomes quite clear that environmental stimuli determine only when and where this instinctive movement is performed, and that their absence does not prevent its performance. The mouse gnaws interminably at the most un-gnawable substitute objects; the hen pecks and pecks, for lack of better objects, at the feathers of her fellow prisoner; the squirrel jumps incessantly, turning somersaults in its narrow cage. An analogous physiological process forces the greylag goose to perform the triumph ceremony and if circum- stances prevail which prevent it from doing so, the wretched bird becomes a pathological parody of its normal self. The goose cannot even discharge the dammed-up urge at a substitute object, as the mouse, the hen and the squirrel can.
A greylag which does not have any partner with whom to perform the triumph ceremony is permanently depressed and sits or stands about moping. Yerkes once said that one chimpanzee is not a chimpanzee at all, and a similar statement is even more emphatically true of a greylag. Even within a populous colony of fellow-members of its own species a single individual not belonging to any triumph ceremony group suffers severely from its loneliness. If one produces such a sad state of affairs experi- mentally, by rearing a goose in complete isolation from its own species, one can regularly observe a number of characteristic disturbances in the unhappy creature’s response to its environ- ment in general and to its social environment in particular. It is a matter of extreme interest that these disturbances are in many ways analogous to those observed by René Spitz in hospitalized children who were deprived of sufficient contact with adult
the bond 201
human beings. What gets more damaged than all other functions is the faculty of dealing actively with new environmental situ- ations. So far from actively striving for new and rewarding stim- uli and exploring their environment, these poor creatures try to avoid all forms of stimulation and act exactly as if these were painful to them. The attitude of lying prone in their cots with their faces turned towards the wall is symptomatic of damage done by hospitalization. Social contact is especially shunned, and even children who are only slightly damaged in this way never look each other or, for that matter, anybody else straight in the face. When put together in the same pen two young geese who had been experimentally crippled in the manner just described avoided each other meticulously and regularly sat in opposite corners with their backs turned. René Spitz, to whom we were able to demonstrate this experiment, was struck by the amazing analogy between the behaviour of these geese and that of the children he had studied in orphan asylums. Unlike human chil- dren, young greylags slowly recover from the damage wrought by deprivation of social contact during infancy. We do not know yet how complete this recovery will be, as restoring to normal takes a very long time. As yet none of our experimental geese has paired.
Even more dramatic than the disturbance caused by prevent- ing a goose from forming normal social contacts are the con- sequences of sundering the bond of a triumph ceremony after it has been firmly established. While early deprivation of social contact creates an entirely artificial situation, the sudden and shattering loss of the triumph-ceremony partner must be a fre- quent happening in the dangerous life of wild geese. The first response to the disappearance of the partner consists in the anx- ious attempt to find him or her again. The goose moves about restlessly by day and night, flying great distances and visiting all places where the partner might be found, uttering all the time the penetrating trisyllabic long-distance call. This behaviour often calls our attention to the fact that one of our geese is missing. The searching expeditions are extended farther and far- ther and quite often the searcher itself gets lost, or succumbs to an accident. From the moment a goose realizes that the partner is missing it loses all courage and flees even from the youngest and weakest geese. As its condition quickly becomes known to all the members of the colony the lonely goose rapidly sinks to the lowest step in the ranking order. The threshold of flight-eliciting stimulation becomes lowered, not only in respect to the attack of conspecifics, but to all other fear-inspiring circumstances as well; the goose can become extremely shy, reluctant to approach human beings and to come to the feeding place; the bird also develops a tendency to panic which further increases its ‘accident-proneness’.
All this applies to half-tame geese reared by their own parents. In hand-reared birds the loss of the triumph-ceremony partner can have apparently opposite effects. Geese which, through years of happy marriage, have not shown the least attachment to their former foster parents, may quite suddenly become strongly reattached to them after being widowed. This is what the gander Max did, after we had exiled friend Kopfschlitz, as told on pages 190–1. After our attention had been called to this phenomenon, we repeatedly observed that geese, after having lost their part- ners, took up again their long-neglected connections with par- ents and siblings. Probably it is due to the same recrudescence of family ties that geese which we had settled, as adult birds, on neighbouring lakes to form new colonies, regularly returned to Seewiesen if they lost their mates.
All the objectively observable characteristics of the goose’s behaviour on losing its mate are roughly identical with those accompanying human grief. This applies particularly to the phe- nomena observable in the sympathetic nervous system. John Bowlby, in his study of infant grief, has given an equally con- vincing and moving description of this primal grieving, and it is
the bond 203
almost incredible how detailed are the analogies we find here in human beings and in birds. Just as in the human face it is the neighbourhood of the eyes that in geese bears the permanent marks of deep grief. The lowering of the tonus in the sympathi- cus causes the eye to sink back deeply in its socket and at the same time decreases the tension of the outer facial muscles sup- porting the eye region from below. Both factors contribute to the formation of a fold of loose skin below the eye which as early as in the ancient Greek mask of tragedy has become the con- ventionalized expression of grief. My dear old greylag, Ada, sev- eral times a widow, was particularly easy to recognize because of the grief-marked expression of her eyes. A knowledgeable visitor who knew nothing about Ada’s history standing beside me at the lake suddenly pointed her out among many geese saying: ‘That goose must have been through a lot!’
It is on principle impossible to make any scientifically legitim- ate assertion about the subjective experiences of animals. The central nervous system of animals is constructed differently from ours, and the physiological processes in it are also different from what happens in our brain. These qualitative differences are sufficient to make us conclude that whatever subjective phe- nomena may correspond to neural processes in animals must be considerably different from what we ourselves experience. How- ever, similarities and analogies in the nervous processes of ani- mals and men are sufficiently great to justify the conclusion that higher animals do indeed have subjective experiences which are qualitatively different from but in essence akin to our own. We are convinced that animals do have emotions, though we shall never be able to say exactly what these emotions are. My teacher Heinroth who was most careful to describe animal behaviour as objectively as possible, was often accused by animal lovers of misrepresenting the living creature as being a machine because of his mechanistic interpretations of behaviour. To such asper- sions he used to answer: ‘On the contrary, I regard animals as very emotional people with very little intelligence!’ We cannot know what a gander is feeling when he stands about displaying all the symptoms of human grief on the loss of his mate, or when he rushes at her in an ecstasy of triumph calling on find- ing her again. But we cannot help feeling that whatever he may experience is closely akin to our own emotions in an analogous situation.
Considered objectively, the whole behaviour of a wild goose deprived of its triumph bond is highly similar to that of a very attached animal if it is uprooted from its home environment and put in a strange one. We see the same desperate searching and the same ebbing of courage all the time the animal is looking for its old surroundings. The greylag goose behaves towards its tri- umph partner just as a resident animal does towards the centre of its territory, being the more tied to it the longer it has known it. Near the centre of the territory, not only intraspecific aggres- sion but many other autonomous activities of the species reach their highest intensity. Monika Meyr-Holzapfel called the part- ner that is a personal friend ‘the animal with the home valency’, and with this term, avoiding all anthropomorphic subjectivity, she has apprehended the fullness of the emotional values pertaining to the true friend.
Poet and psycho-analyst alike have long known how close love and hate are, and we know that in human beings also the object of love is nearly always, in an ambivalent way, an object of aggression too. The triumph ceremony of geese – and this can- not be stressed too often – is at most an extremely simplified model of human friendship, but it shows significantly how such an ambivalence can arise. Though in the greylag the second act of the ceremony, the friendly turning towards the partner, nor- mally contains almost no more aggression, the ceremony as a whole, particularly the first part with its accompaniment of ‘roll- ing’, contains a certain measure of autochthonous aggression directed, if only latently, towards the well-loved friend and
the bond 205
partner. We know that this is so, not only from the phylogenetic considerations discussed in this chapter, but also from observa- tions of exceptional cases throwing light on the interaction of the original aggression and the now autonomous triumph ceremony activation.
Our oldest snow gander, Paulchen, paired in his second year with a snow goose of the same age but kept at the same time a triumph bond with a second snow gander, Schneerot, with whom he lived in brotherly affection. Now snow geese have a habit, common in perching and diving ducks but uncommon in geese, of raping strange females, particularly when they are incubating. The following year, when Paulchen’s wife built her nest, laid her eggs and was sitting on them, an interesting but nasty situation arose: Schneerot raped her persistently and bru- tally and Paulchen made not the slightest attempt to do anything about it. When Schneerot came to the nest and set upon the female, Paulchen rushed at him furiously, but at the last moment swerved past him and attacked any harmless nearby object, for instance our photographer who was filming the scene. Never before was the power of redirection, fixed by ritualization, brought home to me so forcibly: Paulchen wanted to attack Schneerot but could not, because the fixed path of the ritualized movement pattern directed him as firmly past the object of his anger as the points of a railway line direct a locomotive into a siding.
As the behaviour of this gander conclusively shows, aggression-eliciting stimuli, if proceeding from the partner, release only the triumph cry and not attack. In the snow goose the two acts of this ceremony – the first more aggressive and directed outwards, the second an almost entirely socially motiva- ted turning towards the partner – are not so markedly divided as they are in the greylag. A snow goose, particularly in its tri- umph ceremony, seems to be more imbued with aggression than the friendly greylag and its triumph cry is more primitive than that of its grey relative. So in the abnormal case just described we may find a behaviour corresponding in the mech- anisms of its impulses with the primal redirected attack glancing past the partner, such as we have already learned about in cichlid fishes. The Freudian concept of regression is applicable here.
A rather different kind of regression may cause certain changes in the second, less aggressive, phase of the triumph cry of the greylag which show the original participation of the aggression drive. The highly dramatic scene is only enacted when two strong ganders have formed a triumph bond. Since even the most belligerent goose is inferior in strength to the smallest gander, no normal goose pair can ever win a fight against two such friends. Therefore such ganders regularly stand high in the ranking order of the colony. Now with age and with long tenure of high rank ‘self-assurance’, that is assurance of victory, increases, and with it intensity of aggression.
Since at the same time the intensity of the triumph ceremony increases, as we have seen on page 191, with the degree of acquaintance of the partners, that is with the duration of their association, it is understandable that the ceremony of alliance in such a gander couple reaches grades of intensity never attained by pairs of unlike sex. The ganders Max and Kopfschlitz, ‘mar- ried’ for the last nine years, are recognizable from afar by the wild enthusiasm of their triumph ceremony.
Now the triumph ceremony of such ganders sometimes increases beyond all measure, to the pitch of ecstasy, and then something very remarkable and sinister happens: the sounds become increasingly stronger, quicker and more concentrated, the necks more and more horizontal till the upright attitude typical of the ceremony is lost and the angle between the line of the redirected movement and the line pointing directly towards the partner becomes smaller and smaller. In other words, with extreme increase of intensity the ritualized ceremony loses more and more those characteristics which differentiate it from its
the bond 207
unritualized prototype. Thus it regresses, in the Freudian sense, to a phylogenetically earlier primitive condition. J. Nicolai was the first to discover this ‘deritualization’ in bullfinches. In these birds the greeting ceremony of the female has arisen, like the triumph ceremony of geese, from the ritualization of primally threatening gestures. If we increase the sexual drives of a female bullfinch by submitting her to a long period of solitary con- finement and afterwards put her with a male, she will pursue him with greeting gestures whose character is the more aggres- sive the more the sexual drives have been dammed. The tumult of such ecstatic love-hate can, in the gander couple, halt at any stage and subside; then follows a triumph ceremony, still very excited but normally ending in quiet, tender cackling, even if the gestures still have the expression of furious aggression. When one sees such an exhibition of fervent love for the first time, without yet knowing anything about the phenomena above described, one experiences a certain feeling of uneasiness: involuntarily one remembers such expressions as ‘I love you so much I could eat you’ and one recalls what Freud so often stressed, that colloquialisms often reflect deepest psychological associations.
However, in our goose records of the last ten years we have only three cases in which the deritualization of the triumph ceremony, arising to highest ecstasy, did not subside. In these cases there occurs something irrevocable and of great con- sequence for the future life of the individuals: the threatening and fighting attitudes of the two ganders assume purer and purer forms, excitement rises to boiling-point, and suddenly the two friends seize each other by the neck and beat each other with resounding blows of their wings, which are armed with hard little horns at the shoulder. Their grim fight can be heard from afar. While an ordinary fight between two ganders, induced by rivalry for status, for a female, or for a nesting-place, seldom lasts more than a few seconds and never more than a minute, we registered in one of three fights between triumph-cry partners a full quarter of an hour after we had rushed to the scene, alarmed from afar by the sound of battle. The embittered fury of these fights is only partly explained by the fact that the opponents know each other so well that they are less afraid of each other than of strangers. In human beings, too, the particular horror of marital quarrels springs only partly from this source. I am much more inclined to believe that in every case of genuine love there is such a high measure of latent aggression, normally obscured by the bond, that on the rupturing of this bond the horrible phenomenon known as hate makes its appearance. There is no love without aggression, but there is no hate without love!
The victor never pursues the vanquished and we have never known a second fight to take place between the two ganders. On the contrary, they avoid each other meticulously from thence- forth, and when our big flock of geese is grazing on the marsh, the former friends that have fallen out with each other are always to be found at opposite sides of the periphery. If by chance, not having noticed each other in time, or owing to our experiments, they do come near each other, they show the most remarkable behaviour that I have ever seen in animals and I hesitate to describe it for fear of being accused of anthropomorphizing. The ganders are embarrassed! They cannot look at each other. Their glances dart hither and thither, magnetically attracted to the object of their love and hate, then they jerk away from it, as a finger jerks back from hot metal; in addition, both ganders con- stantly perform displacement activities, preening their feathers, shaking imaginary objects from their beaks, and so on. They cannot simply walk away, for any action suggestive of flight is forbidden by the age-old commandment to ‘save face’ at all costs. One cannot help pitying them in their awkward situation.
The investigator of the problems of intra-specific aggression would give much to be able to determine, by an exact quantita-
the bond 209
tive motivation-analysis, the proportions of original aggression and autonomous triumph-cry drive contained in individual cases of this ceremony. We believe that we are gradually nearing the solution to this problem but a description of the researches involved would take us too far here.
Let us recapitulate what has been said in the previous chap- ters about aggression and those special inhibiting mechanisms which, in certain permanently united individuals, not only exclude the possibility of their fighting each other but also create between them a bond such as the triumph ceremony of geese. Let us examine the relations between this bond and those of other mechanisms of community life described in the pre- ceding chapters. As I read through these chapters for the purpose of making this summary, I realize how little I have succeeded in doing justice to the greatness and importance of the phylogenetic phenomena whose workings I think I really understand myself, but which are so difficult to explain, and I am overcome by the discouraging feeling of helplessness. One might think that a scholar with a certain gift of expressing himself, having dedicated his whole life to a specific subject, would be able to describe and communicate the results of his labours in such a way that his reader would understand not only what he knows but also what he feels about them. I can only hope that the following summary of my facts will convey to the reader at least a pale reflection of what I cannot put into words.
As we know from Chapter 8, there are animals totally devoid of aggression which keep together for life in firmly united flocks. One would think that such animals would be pre- destined to develop permanent friendships and brotherly unions of individuals, and yet these characteristics are never found among such peaceable herd creatures; their association is always entirely anonymous. A personal bond, an individual friendship, is found only in animals with highly developed intra-specific aggression, in fact this bond is the firmer, the more aggressive the particular animal and species is. There are few more aggres- sive fish than cichlids, few more aggressive birds than geese. The proverbially most aggressive of all mammals, Dante’s bestia senza pace, the wolf, is the most faithful of friends. Some animals are alternately territorial and aggressive, and non- aggressive and social, according to the season, and in these species every per- sonal bond is limited to the period of aggressiveness. Undoubt- edly the personal bond developed at that phase of evolution when, in aggressive animals, the co-operation of two or more individuals was necessary for a species-preserving purpose, usu- ally brood tending. Doubtless the personal bond, love, arose in many cases from intra-specific aggression, by way of ritualiza- tion of a redirected attack or threatening. Since these rites are tied up with the person of the partner, and since they later become a need as independent instinct actions, they make the presence of a partner an absolute necessity and make the partner itself the ‘animal with home valency’ – having the same emotional value as the home.
Intra-specific aggression is millions of years older than per- sonal friendship and love. During long epochs of the earth’s history there have been animals that were certainly extraordinar- ily fierce and aggressive. Nearly all reptiles of the present day are aggressive and it is unlikely that those of antiquity were less so. But the personal bond is known only in teleost fishes, birds and mammals, that is in groups that did not appear before the early Tertiary period. Thus intra-specific aggression can certainly exist without its counterpart, love, but conversely there is no love without aggression.
A behaviour mechanism that must be sharply differentiated from intra-specific aggression is hate, the ugly little brother of love. As opposed to ordinary aggression, it is directed towards one individual, just as love is, and probably hate presupposes the
the bond 211
presence of love: one can really hate only where one has loved and, even if one denies it, still does.
It is superfluous to point out the analogies between the social behaviour patterns of many animals, particularly wild geese, and those of man. All the truisms in our proverbs seem to apply equally to geese. As good evolutionists and Darwinians we can and must draw important conclusions from this fact. We know that the youngest common ancestors of birds and mammals were very low reptiles of the Upper Devonian and Lower Car- boniferous strata, which certainly had no highly developed social life and were scarcely more intelligent than frogs. Thus the similarities in the social behaviour patterns of the greylag goose and of man are not derived from a common ancestor but have arisen by so-called convergent adaptation. They do not owe their existence to chance; this would be an improbability which could be calculated, but could only be expressed in astronomical figures.
If, in the greylag goose and in man, highly complex norms of behaviour, such as falling in love, strife for ranking order, jeal- ousy, grieving, etc., are not only similar but down to the most absurd details the same, we can be sure that every one of these instincts has a very special survival value, in each case almost or quite the same in the greylag and in man. Only in this way can the conformity of behaviour have developed.
As natural scientists who do not believe in ‘infallible instincts’ or other miracles we of course assume that every one of these behaviour patterns is the function of a corresponding special physical organization of the nervous system, sense organs, etc., in other words of a structure evolved in the organism by selec- tion pressure. If we imagine how complicated a mechanical apparatus such as an electronic brain would have to be to pro- duce a social behaviour pattern like the triumph ceremony, we realize with astonishment that a wonderful organ such as the eye or the ear seems simple in comparison. The more complex and differentiated two analogously constructed and similarly func- tioning organs are, the more right we have to group them in the same functional conception and to call them by the same name, however different their phylogenetic origin may be. When Cephalopods, like octopus, squid and cuttlefish on the one hand, and vertebrates on the other have invented, independently of one another, eyes built on the same principle as the lens camera, and when in both cases these organs have similar constructional units such as lens, iris, vitreous humour and retina, no reason- able person will object to calling both the organ of the Cephalopods and that of the vertebrate an eye – without any inverted commas. We are equally justified in omitting the inverted commas when speaking of the social behaviour patterns of higher animals which are analogous with those of man.
All that I have said in this chapter should be a warning to the spiritual pride of many people. In an animal not even belonging to the favoured class of mammals we find a behaviour mechan- ism that keeps certain individuals together for life, and this behaviour pattern has become the strongest motive governing all action; it can overcome all ‘animal’ drives, such as hunger, sexu- ality, aggression and fear, and it determines social order in its species-characteristic form. In all these points this bond is analogous with those human functions that go hand in hand with the emotions of love and friendship in their purest and noblest form.
