10
Chapter 10: RATS

There is a type of social organization characterized by a form of aggression that we have not yet encountered: the collective aggression of one community against another. I will try to show how the misfunctioning of this social form of intra-specific aggression constitutes ‘evil’ in the real sense of the word, and how the kind of social order now to be discussed represents a model in which we can see some of the dangers threatening ourselves.
In their behaviour towards members of their own community the animals here to be described are models of social virtue; but they change into horrible brutes as soon as they encounter members of any other society of their own species. Com- munities of this type possess too many individual animals for these to know each other personally, and in most cases member- ship of a certain society is identifiable by a definite smell common to all members.
In the huge communities of social insects it has long been known that their societies, often comprising millions, are basically families consisting of the descendants of a single female or pair which founded the colony. It is also well known that among bees, termites and ants, the members of such a large clan recognize each other by a characteristic hive, nest or anthill smell, and that murder occurs if a member of a strange colony inadvertently enters the nest. Massacres ensue if a human experimenter inhumanly tries to mix two colonies. It has, I think, been known only since 1950 that there are large families of rodents which behave similarly. F. Steiniger and J. Eibl- Eibesfeldt made this important discovery at about the same time but independently of each other, Steiniger in the brown rat and Eibl-Eibesfeldt in the house mouse.
Eibl, who at that time was with Otto Koenig at the Wilhel- minenberg Biological Station, worked on the sound principle of living in as close contact as possible with his experimental animals; the house mice, which lived free in his hut, were regu- larly fed by him, and he moved about quietly and carefully so that they were soon tame enough for him to make observations at close quarters. One day he opened a large container in which he had bred a number of big, wild-coloured laboratory mice, not too different to the wild form. As soon as these mice dared to leave the cage and run about in the room they were attacked furiously by the resident wild mice, and only after hard fighting did they manage to regain the safety of their prison which they defended successfully against invasion by the wild mice.
Steiniger put brown rats from different localities into a large enclosure which provided them with completely natural living conditions. At first the individual animals seemed afraid of each other; they were not in an aggressive mood, but they bit each other if they met by chance, particularly if two were driven towards each other along one side of the enclosure, so that they collided at speed. However, they only became really aggressive when they began to settle and take possession of territories. At the same time pair formation started between unacquainted rats from different localities. If several pairs were formed at the same time the ensuing fights might last a long time, but if one pair was formed before the others had started, the tyranny of the united forces of the two partners increased the pressure on the unfortunate co-tenants of the enclosure so much that any further pair formation was prevented. The unpaired rats sank noticeably in rank and were constantly pursued by the two mates. Even in the 120-square-yard large enclosure, two or three weeks sufficed for such a pair to kill all the other residents, ten to fifteen strong adult rats.
The male and female of the victorious pair were equally cruel to their subordinates, but it was plain that he preferred biting males and she females. The subjugated rats scarcely defended themselves, made desperate attempts to flee, and in their desper- ation took a direction which rarely brings safety to rats, namely upwards. Steiniger repeatedly saw weary, wounded rats sitting exposed and in broad daylight high up in bushes and trees, evidently outside occupied territory. The wounds were usually on the end of the back and on the tail, where the pursuer had seized them. Death was seldom caused by sudden, deep wounds or loss of blood but more frequently by sepsis, particularly in the case of bites which penetrated the peritoneum. But usually the animals died of exhaustion and nervous over-stimulation leading to disturbance of the adrenal glands.
A particularly effective and cunning method of killing fellow- members of the species was observed by Steiniger in female rats which became veritable murder-specialists. He writes, ‘They slink up stealthily, suddenly spring at their victim, which is per- haps eating innocently at the feeding-place, and bite it in the side of the neck, frequently injuring the carotid artery. The fight usually lasts only a few seconds, the mortally wounded animal bleeds internally, and on post-mortem profuse haemorrhages are found subcutaneously and in the body cavities.’
Having witnessed the bloody tragedies which enabled the surviving couple finally to rule the whole enclosure, one would hardly expect to see the development of the society which is soon built up by the victorious murderers. The tolerance, the tenderness which characterizes the relation of mammal mothers to their children, extends in the case of the rats not only to the fathers, but to all grandparents, uncles, aunts, cousins and so on. The mothers put their children into the same nest, and it is improbable that each mother tends only her own offspring. There are never any serious fights within the large family even when this comprises dozens of animals. In the wolf-pack, whose members are otherwise so considerate of each other, the highest ranking animals eat first from the common prey. But in the rat- pack there is no ranking order, the pack attacks its prey in a body, and the strongest animals play the chief part in overcoming it. But in eating it, according to Steiniger, ‘the smaller animals are the most forward, the larger ones good-humouredly allow the smaller ones to take pieces of food away from them. In reproduc- tion, too, the more lively half- and three-quarter-grown animals usually take precedence of the adults. All rights are open to them, and even the strongest adult puts nothing in their way’.
Within the pack there is no real fighting, at the most there is slight friction, boxing with the fore-paws or kicking with the hind paws, but never biting; and within the pack there is no individual distance, on the contrary, rats are contact animals in the sense of Hediger, and they like touching each other. The ceremony of friendly contact is the so-called ‘creeping under’, which is performed particularly by young animals, while larger animals show their sympathy for smaller ones by creeping over them. It is interesting that over-demonstrativeness in this respect is the most frequent cause of harmless quarrels within the big family. When an older animal which happens to be eating is importuned too much by a younger one, it repels it by boxing and kicking.
Within the pack there is a quick news system functioning by mood-transmission, and, what is most important, there is a con- servation and traditional passing on of acquired experience. If the rats find a hitherto unknown food, according to Steiniger, the first rat to find it usually decides whether or not the family should eat it. ‘If a few animals of the pack pass the food without eating any, no other pack member will eat any either. If the first rats do not eat poisoned bait, they sprinkle it with their urine or faeces. Even when, owing to local conditions, it is extremely uncomfortable to deposit faeces on top of the poison, neverthe- less it is often done.’ But the most astonishing fact is that knowledge of the danger of a certain bait is transmitted from generation to generation and the knowledge long outlives those individuals which first made the experience. The difficulty of effectively combating the most successful biological opponent to man, the brown rat, lies chiefly in the fact that the rat operates basically with the same methods as those of man, by traditional transmission of experience and its dissemination within the close community.
Serious fights between members of the same big family occur in one situation only, which in many respects is significant and interesting: such fights take place when a strange rat is present and has roused intra-specific, inter-family aggression. What rats do when a member of a strange rat-clan enters their territory or is put in there by a human experimenter is one of the most horrible and repulsive things which can be observed in animals. The strange rat may run around for minutes on end without having any idea of the terrible fate awaiting it; and the resident rats may continue for an equally long time with their ordinary affairs till finally the stranger comes close enough to one of them for it to get wind of the intruder. The information is transmitted like an electric shock through the resident rat and at once the whole colony is alarmed by a process of mood transmission which is communicated in the brown rat by expression movements, but in the house rat by a sharp, shrill, satanic cry which is taken up by all members of the tribe within earshot.
With their eyes bulging from their sockets, their hair standing on end, the rats set out on the rat hunt. They are so angry that if two of them meet they bite each other. ‘So they fight for three to five seconds,’ reports Steiniger, ‘then with necks outstretched they sniff each other thoroughly and afterwards part peacefully. On the day of persecution of the strange rat all the members of the clan are irritable and suspicious.’ Evidently the members of a rat-clan do not know each other personally, as jackdaws, geese and monkeys do, but they recognize each other by the clan smell, like bees and other insects. A member of the clan can be branded as a hated stranger, or vice versa, if its smell has been influenced one way or the other. Eibl removed a rat from a colony and put it in another terrarium specially prepared for the purpose. On its return to the clan enclosure a few days later, it was treated as a stranger, but if the rat was put, together with some soil, nest, etc., from this clan enclosure, into a clean, empty battery jar so that it took with it a dowry of objects impregnated with a clan smell, it would be recognized afterwards, even after an absence of weeks.
Heart-breaking was the fate of a house rat which Eibl had treated in the first way, and which in my presence he put back into the clan enclosure. This animal had obviously not forgotten the smell of the clan but it did not know that its own smell was changed. So it felt perfectly safe and at home, and the cruel bites of its former friends came as a complete surprise to it. Even after several nasty wounds it did not react with fear and desperate flight attempts, as really strange rats do at the first meeting with an aggressive member of the resident clan. To softhearted readers I give the assurance, to biologists I admit hesitatingly, that in this case we did not await the bitter end but put the experimental animal into a protective cage which we then placed in the clan enclosure for repatriation. Without such sentimental interference, the fate of the strange rat would be sealed. The best thing that can happen to it, as S. A. Barnett has observed in individual cases, is that it should die of shock. Otherwise it is slowly torn to pieces by its fellows. Only rarely does one see an animal in such desperation and panic, so conscious of the inevitability of a terrible death, as a rat which is about to be slain by rats. It ceases to defend itself. One cannot help comparing this behaviour with what happens when a rat faces a large predator that has driven it into a corner whence there is no more escape than from the rats of a strange clan. In the face of death it meets the eating enemy with attack, the best method of defence, and springs at it with the shrill war-cry of its species.
What is the purpose of group hate between rat-clans? What species-preserving function has caused its evolution? The dis- turbing thought for the human race is that this good old Darwin- ian train of thought can only be applied where the causes which induce selection derive from the extra-specific environment. Only then does selection bring about adaptation. But wherever competition between members of a species effects sexual selec- tion, there is, as we already know, grave danger that members of a species may in demented competition drive each other into the most stupid blind alley of evolution. On pages 37, 38 we have read of the wings of the argus pheasant and the working pace of western civilized man as examples of such errors of evolution. It is thus quite possible that the group hate between rat-clans is really a diabolical invention which serves no good purpose. On the other hand it is not impossible that as yet unknown external selection factors are still at work; we can, however, maintain with certainty that those indispensable species-preserving functions of intra-specific aggression which have been discussed in Chapter 4, are not served by clan fights. These serve neither spatial distribution nor the selection of strong family defenders – for among rats these are seldom the fathers of the descendants – nor any of the functions enumerated in Chapter 3.
It can readily be seen that the constant warfare between large neighbouring families of rats must exert a huge selection pres- sure in the direction of an ever-increasing ability to fight, and that a rat-clan which cannot keep up in this respect must soon fall victim to extermination. Probably natural selection has put a premium on the most highly populated families, since the members of a clan evidently assist each other in fights against strangers, and thus a smaller clan is at a disadvantage in fights against a larger one. On the small North Sea island of Norde- roog, Steiniger found that the ground was divided between a small number of rat-clans separated by a strip of about fifty yards of no-man’s-land – no-rat’s land – where fights constantly took place. The front is relatively larger for a small clan than for a big one, and the small one is therefore at a disadvantage.
It can be predicted that in the not-too-distant future all small clans will have gone to the wall. The question, however, whether, two or three well-balanced large clans will remain in co- existance or whether one of them will achieve ultimate mastery cannot as yet be answered.
