Chapter 13: ECCE HOMO!

Let us imagine that an absolutely unbiased observer on another planet, perhaps on Mars, is examining human behaviour on earth, with the aid of a telescope whose magnification is too small to enable him to discern individuals and follow their separate behaviour, but large enough for him to observe occurrences such as migration of peoples, wars and similar great historical events. He would never gain the impression that human behaviour was dictated by intelligence, still less by responsible morality. If we suppose our extraneous observer to be a being of pure reason, devoid of instincts himself and unaware of the way in which all instincts in general and aggres- sion in particular can miscarry, he would be at a complete loss how to explain history at all. The ever-recurrent phenomena of history do not have reasonable causes. It is a mere commonplace to say that they are caused by what common parlance so aptly terms ‘human nature’. Unreasoning and unreasonable human nature causes two nations to compete, though no economic necessity compels them to do so; it induces two political parties or religions with amazingly similar programmes of salvation to fight each other bitterly and it impels an Alexander or a Napo- leon to sacrifice millions of lives in his attempt to unite the world under his sceptre. We have been taught to regard some of the persons who have committed these and similar absurdities with respect, even as ‘great’ men, we are wont to yield to the political wisdom of those in charge, and we are all so accus- tomed to these phenomena that most of us fail to realize how abjectly stupid and undesirable the historical mass behaviour of humanity actually is.
Having realized this, however, we cannot escape the question why reasonable beings do behave so unreasonably. Undeniably, there must be superlatively strong factors which are able to over- come the commands of individual reason so completely and which are so obviously impervious to experience and learning. As Hegel said, ‘What experience and history teach us is this – that people and governments have never learnt anything from history, or acted on principles deduced from it.’
All these amazing paradoxes, however, find an unconstrained explanation, falling into place like the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle, if one assumes that human behaviour, and particularly human social behaviour, far from being determined by reason and cul- tural tradition alone, is still subject to all the laws prevailing in all phylogenetically adapted instinctive behaviour. Of these laws we possess a fair amount of knowledge from studying the instincts of animals. Indeed, if our extramundane observer were a know- ledgeable ethologist, he would unavoidably draw the conclusion that man’s social organization is very similar to that or rats which, like humans, are social and peaceful beings within their clans, but veritable devils towards all fellow-members of their species not belonging to their own community. If, furthermore, our Martian naturalist knew of the explosive rise in human populations, the ever-increasing destructiveness of weapons, and the division of mankind into a few political camps, he would not expect the future of humanity to be any rosier than that of several hostile clans of rats on a ship almost devoid of food. And this prognosis would even be optimistic, for in the case of rats reproduction stops automatically when a certain state of over- crowding is reached, while man as yet has no workable system for preventing the so-called population explosion. Furthermore, in the case of the rats it is likely that after the wholesale slaughter enough individuals would be left over to propagate the species. In the case of man, this would not be so certain after the use of the hydrogen bomb.
It is a curious paradox that the greatest gifts of man, the unique faculties of conceptual thought and verbal speech which have raised him to a level high above all other creatures and given him mastery over the globe, are not altogether blessings, or at least are blessings that have to be paid for very dearly indeed. All the great dangers threatening humanity with extinc- tion are direct consequences of conceptual thought and verbal speech. They drove man out of the paradise in which he could follow his instincts with impunity and do or not do whatever he pleased. There is much truth in the parable of the tree of know- ledge and its fruit, though I want to make an addition to it to make it fit into my own picture of Adam: that apple was thor- oughly unripe! Knowledge springing from conceptual thought robbed man of the security provided by his well-adapted instincts long, long before it was sufficient to provide him with an equally safe adaptation. Man is, as Arnold Gehlen has so truly said, by nature a jeopardized creature.
Conceptual thought and speech changed all man’s evolution by achieving something which is equivalent to the inheritance of acquired characters. We have forgotten that the verb inherit had a juridical connotation long before it acquired a biological one. When a man invents, let us say, bow and arrow, not only his progeny but his entire community will inherit the knowledge and the use of these tools and possess them just as surely as organs grown on the body. Nor is their loss any more likely than the rudimentation of an organ of equal survival value. Thus, within one or two generations a process of ecological adaptation can be achieved which, in normal phylogeny and without the interference of conceptual thought, would have taken a time of an altogether different, much greater order of magnitude. Small wonder indeed if the evolution of social instincts and, what is even more important, social inhibitions could not keep pace with the rapid development forced on human society by the growth of traditional culture, particularly material culture.
Obviously, instinctive behaviour mechanisms failed to cope with the new circumstances which culture unavoidably pro- duced even at its very dawn. There is evidence that the first inventors of pebble tools, the African Australopithecines, promptly used their new weapon to kill not only game, but fellow-members of their species as well. Peking Man, the Pro- metheus who learned to preserve fire, used it to roast his brothers: beside the first traces of the regular use of fire lie the mutilated and roasted bones of Sinanthropus pekinenis himself.
One is tempted to believe that every gift bestowed on man by his power of conceptual thought has to be paid for with a dan- gerous evil as the direct consequence of it. Fortunately for us, this is not so. Besides the faculty of conceptual thought, another constituent characteristic of man played an important role in gaining a deeper understanding of his environment, and this is curiosity. Insatiable curiosity is the root of exploration and experimentation, and these activities, even in their most primi- tive form, imply a function akin to asking questions. Explorative experimentation is a sort of dialogue with surrounding nature. Asking a question and recording the answer lead to anticipating the latter, and, given conceptual thought, to the linking of cause and effect. From hence it is but a step to consciously foreseeing the consequences of one’s actions. Thus, the same human facul- ties which supplied man with tools and with power dangerous to himself, also gave him the means to prevent their misuse: rational responsibility. I shall now proceed to discuss, one by one, the dangers which humanity incurs by rising above the other animals by virtue of its great specific gifts. Subsequently I shall try to show in what way the greatest gift of all, rational, responsible morality, functions in banning these dangers. Most important of all, I shall have to expound the functional limitation of morality.
In the chapter on behaviour mechanisms functionally analo- gous to morality I have spoken of the inhibitions controlling aggression in various social animals, preventing it from injuring or killing fellow-members of the species. As I explained, these inhibitions are most important and consequently most highly differentiated in those animals which are capable of killing living creatures of about their own size. A raven can peck out the eye of another with one thrust of its beak, a wolf can rip the jugular vein of another with a single bite. There would be no more ravens and no more wolves if reliable inhibitions did not prevent such actions. Neither a dove nor a hare nor even a chimpanzee is able to kill its own kind with a single peck or bite; in addition, animals with relatively poor defensive weapons have a corre- spondingly great ability to escape quickly, even from specially armed predators which are more efficient in chasing, catching and killing than even the strongest of their own species. Since there rarely is, in nature, the possibility of such an animal ser- iously injuring one of its own kind, there is no selection pressure at work to breed inhibitions against killing. The absence of such inhibitions is apparent to the animal keeper – to his own and to his animals’ disadvantage – if he does not take seriously the intra-specific fights of completely ‘harmless’ animals. Under the unnatural conditions of captivity, where a defeated animal can- not escape from its victor, it may be killed slowly and cruelly. In my book King Solomon’s Ring, I have described in the chapter ‘Morals and Weapons’ how the symbol of peace, the dove, can torture one of its own kind to death, without any inhibition being aroused.
Anthropologists concerned with the habits of Australopi- thecus have repeatedly stressed that these hunting progenitors of man have left humanity with the dangerous heritage of what they term ‘carnivorous mentality’. This statement confuses the concept of the carnivore and the cannibal which are, to a large extent, mutually exclusive. One can only deplore the fact that man has definitely not got a carnivorous mentality! All his trouble arises from his being a basically harmless, omnivorous creature, lacking in natural weapons with which to kill big prey, and, therefore, also devoid of the built-in safety devices which prevent ‘professional’ carnivores from abusing their killing power to destroy fellow-members of their own species. A lion or a wolf may, on extremely rare occasions, kill another by one angry stroke, but, as I have already explained in the chapter on behaviour mechanisms functionally analogous to morality, all heavily armed carnivores possess sufficiently reliable inhibitions which prevent the self-destruction of the species.
In human evolution, no inhibitory mechanisms preventing sudden manslaughter were necessary, because quick killing was impossible anyhow; the potential victim had plenty of opportun- ity to elicit the pity of the aggressor by submissive gestures and appeasing attitudes. No selection pressure arose in the prehistory of mankind to breed inhibitory mechanisms preventing the kill- ing of conspecifics until, all of a sudden, the invention of arti- ficial weapons upset the equilibrium of killing potential and social inhibitions. When it did, man’s position was very nearly that of a dove which, by some unnatural trick of nature, has suddenly acquired the beak of a raven. One shudders at the thought of a creature as irascible as all pre-human primates are swinging a well-sharpened hand-axe. Humanity would indeed have destroyed itself by its first inventions, were it not for the very wonderful fact that inventions and responsibility are both the achievements of the same specifically human faculty of asking questions.
Not that our pre-human ancestor, even at a stage as yet devoid of moral responsibility, was a fiend incarnate, he was by no means poorer in social instincts and inhibitions than a chimpan- zee which, after all, is – his irascibility notwithstanding – a social and friendly creature. But whatever his innate norms of social behaviour may have been, they were bound to be thrown out of gear by the invention of weapons. If humanity survived, as after all it did, it never achieved security from the danger of self- destruction. If moral responsibility and unwillingness to kill have indubitably increased, the ease and emotional impunity of killing have increased at the same rate. The distance at which all shooting weapons take effect screens the killer against the stimu- lus situation which would otherwise activate his killing inhibi- tions. The deep, emotional layers of our personality simply do not register the fact that the crooking of the fore-finger to release a shot tears the entrails of another man. No sane man would even go rabbit-hunting for pleasure if the necessity of killing his prey with his natural weapons brought home to him the full emotional realization of what he is actually doing.
The same principle applies to an even greater degree to the use of modern remote-control weapons. The man who presses the releasing button is so completely screened against seeing, hearing or otherwise emotionally realizing the consequences of his action, that he can commit it with impunity – even if he is burdened with the power of imagination. Only thus can it be explained that perfectly good-natured men, who would not even smack a naughty child, proved to be perfectly able to release rockets or to lay carpets of incendiary bombs on sleeping cities, thereby committing hundreds and thousands of children to a horrible death in the flames. The fact that it is good, normal men who did this is as eerie as any fiendish atrocity of war!
As an indirect consequence, the invention of artificial weapons has brought about a most undesirable predominance of intra-specific selection within mankind. In the third chapter in which I discussed the survival value of aggression, and also in the tenth, dealing with the structure of society in rats, I have already spoken of the manner in which competition between the fellow-members of one species can produce unadaptive results when it exerts a selection pressure totally unrelated to extra-specific environment (Chapter 3, pages 35–9).
When man, by virtue of his weapons and other tools, of his clothing and of fire, had more or less mastered the inimical forces of his extra-specific environment, a state of affairs must have prevailed in which the counter-pressures of the hostile neighbouring hordes had become the chief selecting factor determining the next steps of human evolution. Small wonder indeed if it produced a dangerous excess of what has been termed the ‘warrior virtues’ of man.
In 1955, I wrote in a paper, ‘On the killing of members of the same species: ‘I believe – and human psychologists, particularly psycho-analysts should test this – that present-day civilized man suffers from insufficient discharge of his aggressive drive. It is more than probable that the evil effects of the human aggressive drives, explained by Sigmund Freud as the results of a special death wish, simply derive from the fact that in prehistoric times intra-specific selection bred into man a measure of aggression drive for which in the social order of today he finds no adequate outlet’. If these words contain an element of reproach against psycho-analysis, I must here withdraw them. At the time of writing, there were already some psycho-analysts who did not believe in the death wish and rightly explained the self- destroying effects of aggression as misfunctions of an instinct that was essentially life-preserving. Later I came to know one psychiatrist and psycho-analyst who, even at that time, was examining the problem of the hypertrophy of aggression owing to intra-specific selection.

Sydney Margolin, in Denver, Colorado, made very exact psycho-analytical and psycho-sociological studies on Prairie Indians, particularly the Utes, and showed that these people suf- fer greatly from an excess of aggression drive which, under the ordered conditions of present-day North American Indian reser- vations, they are unable to discharge. It is Margolin’s opinion that during the comparatively few centuries when Prairie Indians led a wild life consisting almost entirely of war and raids, there must have been an extreme selection pressure at work, breeding extreme aggressiveness. That this produced changes in the hereditary pattern in such a short time is quite possible. Domestic animals can be changed just as quickly by purposeful selection. Margolin’s assumption is supported by the fact that Ute Indians now growing up under completely different edu- cational influences suffer in exactly the same way as the older members of their tribe who had grown up under the edu- cational system of their own culture; moreover, the pathological symptoms under discussion are seen only in those Prairie Indians whose tribes were subjected to the selection process described.
Ute Indians suffer more frequently from neuroses than any other human group, and again and again Margolin found that the cause of the trouble was undischarged aggression. Many of these Indians feel, and describe themselves as ill, and when asked what is the matter with them they can only say, ‘I am an Ute!’ Violence towards people not of their tribe, and even man- slaughter, belong to the order of the day, but attacks on members of the tribe are extremely rare, for they are prevented by a taboo the severity of which it is easy to understand, considering the early history of the Utes: a tribe constantly at war with neigh- bouring Indians and, later on, with the white man, must avoid at all costs fights between its own members. Anyone killing a member of the tribe is compelled by strict tradition to commit suicide. This commandment was obeyed even by an Ute policeman who had shot a member of his tribe in self-defence while trying to arrest him. The offender, while under the influ- ence of drink, had stabbed his father in the femoral artery, causing him to bleed to death. When the policeman was ordered by his sergeant to arrest the man for manslaughter – it was obviously not murder – he protested, saying that the man would want to die since he was bound by tradition to commit suicide and would do so by resisting arrest and forcing the policeman to shoot him. He, the policeman, would then have to commit suicide himself. The more than short-sighted sergeant stuck to his order and the tragedy took place exactly as pre- dicted. This and others of Margolin’s records read like Greek tragedies: an inexorable fate forces crime upon people and then compels them to expiate voluntarily their involuntarily acquired guilt.
It is objectively convincing, indeed it is proof of the correct- ness of Margolin’s interpretation of the behaviour of Ute Indians that these people are particularly susceptible to accidents. It has been proved that accident-proneness may result from repressed aggression, and in these Utes the rate of motor accidents exceeds that of any other car-driving human group. Anybody who has ever driven a fast car when really angry knows – in so far as he is capable of self-observation in this condition – what strong inclination there is to self-destructive behaviour in a situation like this. Here even the expression ‘death wish’ seems apt.
It is self-evident that intra-specific selection is still working today in an undesirable direction. There is a high positive selec- tion premium on the instinctive foundations conducive to such traits as the amassing of property, self-assertion, etc., etc., and there is an almost equally high negative premium on simple goodness. Commercial competition today might threaten to fix hereditarily in us hypertrophies of these traits as horrible as the intra-specific aggression evolved by competition between warfaring tribes of Stone Age man. It is fortunate that the accumulation of riches and power does not necessarily lead to large families – rather the opposite – or else the future of mankind would look even darker than it does.
Aggressive behaviour and killing inhibitions represent only one special case among many in which phylogenetically adapted behaviour mechanisms are thrown out of balance by the rapid change wrought in human ecology and sociology by cultural development. In order to explain the function of responsible morality in re-establishing a tolerable equilibrium between man’s instincts and the requirements of a culturally evolved social order, a few words must first be said about social instincts in general. It is a widely held opinion, shared by some con- temporary philosophers, that all human behaviour patterns which serve the welfare of the community, as opposed to that of the individual, are dictated by specifically human rational thought. Not only is this opinion erroneous, but the very oppos- ite is true. If it were not for a rich endowment of social instincts, man could never have risen above the animal world. All specific- ally human faculties, the power of speech, cultural tradition, moral responsibility could have evolved only in a being which, before the very dawn of conceptual thinking, lived in well- organized communities. Our pre-human ancestor was indubit- ably as true a friend to his friend as a chimpanzee or even a dog, as tender and solicitous to the young of his community and as self-sacrificing in its defence, aeons before he developed con- ceptual thought and became aware of the consequences of his actions.
According to Immanuel Kant’s teachings on morality, it is human reason (Vernunft) alone which supplies the categorical imperative ‘thou shalt’ as an answer to responsible self- questioning concerning any possible consequences of a certain action. However, it is doubtful whether ‘reason’ is the correct translation of Kant’s use of the word Vernunft which also implies the connotation of common sense and of understanding and appreciation of another ‘reasonable’ being. For Kant it is self-evident that one reasonable being cannot possibly want to hurt another. This unconscious acceptance of what he con- sidered self-evident, in other words, of common sense, repre- sents the chink in the great philosopher’s shining armour of pure rationality, through which emotion, which always means an instinctive urge, creeps into his considerations and makes them more acceptable to the biologically minded than they would otherwise be. It is hard to believe that a man will refrain from a certain action which natural inclination urges him to perform only because he has realized that it involves a logical contradiction. To assume this one would have to be an even more unworldly German professor and an even more ardent admirer of reason than Immanuel Kant was.
In reality, even the fullest rational insight into the con- sequences of an action and into the logical consistency of its premise would not result in an imperative or in a prohibition, were it not for some emotional, in other words instinctive, source of energy supplying motivation. Like power steering in a modern car, responsible morality derives the energy which it needs to control human behaviour from the same primal powers which it was created to keep in rein. Man as a purely rational being, divested of his animal heritage of instincts, would certainly not be an angel – the opposite.
Supposing that a being entirely indifferent to values, unable to see anything worth preserving in humanity, in human culture and in life itself, were examining the principle of the action of pressing the button releasing the hydrogen bomb, thereby destroying all life on our planet; even a full realization of the consequences would, in such a monster, elicit no imperative for- bidding the deed, but only a reaction tantamount to saying ‘So what?’ We need not even suppose this hypothetical creature to be actively evil and to share the view of Goethe’s Mephistopheles that everything created is worthy of annihilation; mere absence of any emotional appreciation of values could make it react in the way described.
Always and everywhere it is the unreasoning, emotional appreciation of values that adds a plus or a minus sign to the answer of Kant’s categorical self-questioning and makes it an imperative or a veto. By itself, reason can only devise means to achieve otherwise determined ends; it cannot set up goals nor give us orders. Left to itself, reason is like a computer into which no relevant information conducive to an important answer has been fed; logically valid though all its operations may be, it is a wonderful system of wheels within wheels, without a motor to make them go round. The motive power that makes them do so stems from instinctive behaviour mechanisms much older than reason and not directly accessible to rational self-observation. They are the source of love and friendship, of all warmth of feeling, of appreciation of beauty, of the urge to artistic creative- ness, of insatiable curiosity striving for scientific enlightenment. These deepest strata of the human personality are, in their dynamics, not essentially different from the instincts of animals, but on their basis human culture has erected all the enormous superstructure of social norms and rites whose function is so closely analogous to that of phylogenetic ritualization. Both phylogenetically and culturally evolved norms of behaviour rep- resent motives and are felt to be values by any normal human being. Both are woven into an immensely complicated system of universal interaction to analyse which is all the more difficult as most of its processes take place in the subconscious and are by no means directly accessible to self-observation. Yet it is impera- tive for us to understand the dynamics of this system, because insight into the nature of values offers the only hope for our ever creating the new values and ideals which our present situation needs so badly.
Even the first compensatory function of moral responsibility, preventing the Australopithecines from destroying themselves with their first pebble tools, could not have been achieved with- out an instinctive appreciation of life and death. Some of the most intelligent and most social birds and mammals react in a highly dramatic way to the sudden death of a member of their species. Greylag geese will stand with outspread wings over a dying friend hissing defensively, as Heinroth saw after having shot a goose in the presence of its family. I observed the same behaviour on the occasion of an Egyptian goose killing a greylag gosling by hitting it on the head with its wing; the gosling staggered towards its parents and collapsed, dying of cerebral haemorrhage. Though the parents could not have seen the deadly blow, they reacted in the way described. In the Munich zoo some years ago an essentially friendly bull elephant while playing with his keeper unintentionally injured him severely, severing an artery in the man’s thigh. The elephant immediately seemed to realize that something dangerous had befallen his friend and with the best intentions did the worst thing he could do: he stood protectively over the fallen man, thus preventing medical aid from reaching him. Professor Bernhard Grzimek told me that an adult male chimpanzee which had bitten him rather badly, seemed very concerned, after his rage had abated, about what he had done and tried to press together, with his fingers, the lips of Grzimek’s worst wounds. It is highly charac- teristic of that dauntless scientist that he permitted the ape to do so.
It is safe to assume that the first Cain, after having stricken a fellow-member of his horde with a pebble tool, was deeply concerned about the consequences of his action. He may have struck with very little malice, just as a two-year-old child may hit another with a heavy and hard object without foreseeing the effect. He may have been most painfully surprised when his friend failed to get up again, he may even have tried to help him rise, as the bull elephant is reported to have done. In any case we are safe in assuming that the first killer fully realized the enormity of his deed. There was no need for the information being slowly passed around that the horde loses dangerously in fighting potential if it slaughters too many of its members for the pot.
Whatever the consequences may have been that prevented the first killers from repeating their deed, realization of these con- sequences and, therewith, a primitive form of responsibility must have been at work. Apart from maintaining the equi- librium between the ability and the inhibition to kill, respon- sible morality does not seem to have been too severely taxed in the earliest communities of true men. It is no daring speculation to assume that the first human beings who really represented our own species, those of Cro-Magnon, had roughly the same instincts and natural inclinations as we have ourselves. Nor is it illegitimate to assume that the structure of their societies and their tribal warfare was roughly the same as can still be found in certain tribes of Papuans in central New Guinea. Every one of their tiny settlements is permanently at war with the neighbour- ing villages; their relationship is described by Margaret Mead as one of mild reciprocal head-hunting, ‘mild’ meaning that there are no organized raids for the purpose of removing the treasured heads of neighbouring warriors, but only the occasional taking of the heads of women and children encountered in the woods.
Now let us suppose that our assumption is correct and that the men of such a palaeolithic tribe did indeed have the same natural inclinations, the same endowment with social instincts as we have ourselves; let us imagine a life, lived dangerously in the exclusive company of a dozen or so close friends and their wives and children. There would be some friction, some jealousy about girls, or rank order, but on the whole I think that this kind of rivalry would come second to the continuous necessity for mutual defence against hostile neighbouring tribes. The men would have fought side by side ever since they could remember; they would have saved each other’s lives many times; all would have ample opportunity to discharge intra-specific aggression against their enemies, none would feel the urge to injure a member of his own community. In short, the sociological situ- ation must have been, in very many respects, comparable to that of the soldiers of a small fighting unit on a particularly danger- ous and independent assignment. We know to what heights of heroism and utter self-abnegation average, unromantic modern men have risen under these circumstances. Incidentally, it is quite typical of man that his most noble and admirable qualities are brought to the fore in situations involving the killing of other men, just as noble as he is! However cruel and savage such a community may be to another, within its bonds natural inclina- tion alone is very nearly sufficient to make men obey the ten commandments – perhaps with the exception of the third. One does not steal another man’s rations or weapons and it seems rather dirty to covet the wife of a man who has saved one’s life a number of times. One would certainly not kill him, and one would, from natural inclination, honour not only father and mother, but the aged and experienced in general, just as deer and baboons do, according to the observations of Fraser Darling, Washburn and De Vore.
The imagination of man’s heart is not really evil from his youth, as the book of Genesis asserts. Man can behave very decently indeed in tight spots, provided they are of a kind that occurred often enough in the palaeolithic period to produce phylogenetically adapted social norms that deal with the situ- ation. Loving your neighbour like yourself and risking your life in trying to save his is a matter of course if he is your best friend and has saved yours a number of times; you do it without even thinking. The situation is entirely different if the man for whose life you are expected to risk your own, or for whom you are supposed to make other sacrifices, is an anonymous contem- porary on whom you have never set eyes. In this case it is not love for the fellow human being that activates self-denying behaviour – if indeed it is activated – but the love for some culturally evolved traditional norm of social behaviour. Love of something or other is, in very many cases, the motivation behind the power of the categorical imperative – an assertion which, I think, Kant would deny.
Our Cro-Magnon warrior had plenty of hostile neighbours against whom to discharge his aggressive drive and he had just the right number of reliable friends to love. His moral responsi- bility was not overtaxed by an exercise of function which pre- vented him from striking, in sudden anger, at his companions with his sharpened hand-axe. The increase in number of indi- viduals belonging to the same community is in itself sufficient to upset the balance between the personal bonds and the aggressive drive. It is definitely detrimental to the bond of friendship if a person has too many friends. It is proverbial that one can have only a few really close friends. To have a large number of ‘acquaintances’, many of whom may be faithful allies with a legitimate claim to be regarded as real friends, overtaxes a man’s capacity for personal love and dilutes the intensity of his emo- tional attachment. The close crowding of many individuals in a small space brings about a fatigue of all social reactions. Every inhabitant of a modern city is familiar with the surfeit of social relationships and responsibilities and knows the disturbing feel- ing of not being as pleased as he ought to be at the visit of a friend, even if he is genuinely fond of him and has not seen him for a long time. One notices in oneself a tendency to bad temper when the telephone rings after dinner. That crowding increases the propensity to aggressive behaviour has long been known and demonstrated experimentally by sociological research.
On the other hand, there is, in the modern community, no legitimate outlet for aggressive behaviour. To keep the peace is the first of civic duties and the hostile neighbouring tribe, once the target at which to discharge phylogenetically programmed aggression, has now withdrawn to an ideal distance, hidden behind a curtain, if possible of iron. Among the many phylo- genetically adapted norms of human social behaviour there is hardly one that does not need to be controlled and kept in leash by responsible morality. This indeed is the deep truth contained in all sermons preaching asceticism. Most of the vices and deadly sins condemned today correspond to inclinations that were purely adaptive or at least harmless in primitive man. Palaeolithic people hardly ever had enough to eat and if, for once, they had trapped a mammoth, it was biologically correct and moral for every member of the horde to gorge to his utmost capacity; gluttony was not a vice. When, for once, they were fully fed, primitive human beings rested from their strenuous life and were as absolutely lazy as possible, but there was nothing repre- hensible in their sloth. Their life was so hard that there was no danger of healthy sensuality degenerating into debauch. A man sorely needed to keep his few possessions, weapons and tools and a few nuts for tomorrow’s meal; there was no danger of his hoarding instinct turning into avarice. Alcohol was not invented and there are no indications that man had discovered the reinforcing properties of alkaloids, the only real vices known of present-day primitive tribes. In short, man’s endowment with phylogenetically adapted patterns of behaviour met the requirements well enough to make the task of responsible morality very easy indeed. Its only commandment at the time was: Thou shalt not strike thy neighbour with a hand-axe even if he angers thee.
Clearly, the task of compensation devolving on responsible morality increases at the same rate at which the ecological and sociological conditions created by culture deviate from those to which human instinctive behaviour is phylogenetically adapted. Not only does this deviation continue to increase, but it does so with an acceleration that is truly frightening.
The fate of humanity hangs on the question whether or not responsible morality will be able to cope with its rapidly growing burden. We shall not lighten this burden by over- estimating the strength of morality, still less by attributing omnipotence to it. We have better chances of supporting moral responsibility in its ever-increasing task if we humbly realize and acknowledge that it is ‘only’ a compensatory mechanism of very limited strength and that, as I have already explained, it derives what power it has from the same kind of motivational sources as those which it has been created to control. I have already said that the dynamics of instinctive drives, of phyletically and culturally ritualized behaviour patterns, together with the con- trolling force of responsible morality, form a very complicated systemic whole which is not easy to analyse. However, the recognition of the mutual functional interdependence of its parts, even at the present incomplete stage of our knowledge, helps us to understand a number of phenomena which otherwise would remain completely unintelligible.
We all suffer to some extent from the necessity of controlling our natural inclinations by the exercise of moral responsibility. Some of us, lavishly endowed with social inclinations, suffer hardly at all, other less lucky ones need all the strength of their sense of moral responsibility to keep from getting into trouble with the strict requirements of modern society. According to a useful old psychiatric definition, a psychopath is a man who either suffers himself from the demands of society or else makes society suffer. Thus in one sense we are all psychopaths, for each of us suffers from the necessity of self-imposed control for the good of the community. The above-mentioned definition, how- ever, was meant to apply particularly to those people who do not just suffer in secret, but overtly break down under the stress imposed upon them, becoming either neurotic or delinquent. Even according to this much narrower interpretation of our definition, the ‘normal’ human being differs from the psycho- path, the good man from the criminal, much less sharply than the healthy man differs from the pathological. This difference is analogous to that between a man with a compensated valvular deficiency of the heart and one with a decompensated heart disease. In the first case, an increase of the work performed by the heart muscles is sufficient to compensate for the mechanical defect of the valve, so that the overall pumping performance of the heart is adapted to the requirements of the body, at least for the time being. When the muscle finally breaks down under the prolonged strain, the heart becomes ‘decompensated’. This ana- logy also goes to show that the compensatory function uses up energy.
This explanation of the essential function of responsible mor- ality resolves a contradiction in Kant’s doctrine of morality which was noticed earlier by Friedrich Schiller. He whom Herder called ‘the most inspired of all Kantians’ opposed Kant’s devaluation of all natural inclinations and satirized it in the wonderful Xenie: ‘Gerne dien ich dem Freund, doch leider tu’ ich’s aus Neigung, darum wurmt es mich oft, das ich nicht tugendhaft bin’ – ‘I like serving my friend but, alas, I do it from inclination, and thus it often vexes me that I am not virtuous.’
However, not only do we serve our friend by inclination but we judge his acts of friendship according to whether it was warm, natural inclination that prompted him to perform them. If we were utterly logical Kantians, we would have to do the opposite and value most the man who instinctively dislikes us but who by responsible self-questioning is forced, much against his inclinations, to treat us kindly; however, in actual fact we can feel at most a tepid form of respect for such a benefactor, but we have a warm affection for the man who treats us as a friend because he ‘feels that way’, without thinking that he is doing something worthy of gratitude.
When my unforgettable teacher, Ferdinand Hochstetter, at the age of seventy-one gave his valedictory address at Vienna Uni- versity, the then Chancellor thanked him warmly for his long and inspired work. Hochstetter’s answer put in a nutshell the whole paradox of value and non-value of natural inclination. He said, ‘You are thanking me for something for which I deserve no gratitude. Thank my parents, my ancestors who transmitted to me these and no other inclinations. And if you ask me what I have done throughout my life in the fields of research and teach- ing then I must honestly say: I have always done the thing which, at the moment, I considered the greatest fun!’
What a strange contradiction! This great scientist who, as I know for a fact, had never read Kant, here shared the philo- sopher’s standpoint in denying all value to natural inclination while, at the same time, the inestimable value of his work, accomplished ‘just for fun’, reduces the Kantian theory of values and morality ad absurdum even more effectively than Friedrich Schiller’s epigram.
Yet it is easy to resolve this seeming contradiction if we bear in mind that moral responsibility functions as a compensatory mechanism in a system of which natural inclination, by no means necessarily devoid of value, forms another indispensable part.
If we are assessing the behaviour of a certain person, ourselves for example, we will naturally rate any particular action the higher the less it is motivated by natural inclination. On the other hand, if we are assessing people as friends we will natur- ally prefer the ones whose friendship does not spring from rational considerations – however moral these may be – but from the warm feelings of natural inclination. It is no paradox but plain common sense that we use two different standards for judging the deeds of a man and the man himself.
The man who behaves socially from natural inclination nor- mally makes few demands on the controlling mechanism of his own moral responsibility. Thus, in times of stress, he has huge reserves of moral strength to draw upon; while the man who even in everyday life has constantly to exert all his moral strength in order to curb his natural inclinations into a semblance of normal social behaviour is very likely to break down completely in case of additional stress. Our parable of the compensated heart disorder applies quite exactly here, particularly regarding its energetical aspects.
The stress under which morally responsible behaviour breaks down can be of varying kinds. It is not so much the one sudden great temptation that makes human morality break down, as the effect of any prolonged situation that exerts an unceasing strain on the compensatory power of morality. Hunger, anxiety, end- lessly facing difficult decisions, overwork, hopelessness and so on all have the effect of sapping moral energy and, in the long run, making it break down. Anyone who has had the opportun- ity to observe men under this kind of strain, for example in war or in prisoner of war camps, knows how unpredictably and suddenly moral decompensation sets in. Men in whose strength one trusted unconditionally suddenly break down, and others of whom one would never have expected it prove to be sources of inexhaustible energy, keeping up the morale of others by their example. Anyone who has experienced such things knows that the fervour of good intention and its power of endurance are two independent variables. Once you have realized this, you cease to feel superior to the man who breaks down a little sooner than you do yourself. Even the best and noblest reaches a point where his resistance is at an end: ‘Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?’
As already mentioned, norms of social behaviour developed by cultural ritualization play at least as important a part in the context of human society as instinctive motivation and the con- trol exerted by responsible morality. Even at the earliest dawn of culture, when the invention of tools was just beginning to upset the equilibrium of phylogenetically evolved patterns of social behaviour, man’s newborn responsibility must have found a strong aid in cultural ritualization. Evidence of cultural rites reaches back almost as far as that of the use of tools and of fire. Of course we can expect prehistorical evidence of culturally ritualized behaviour only when ritualization has reached com- paratively high levels of differentiation, as in burial ceremonies or in the arts of painting and sculpture. These make their first appearance simultaneously with our own species and the won- derful proficiency of the first-known painters and sculptors sug- gests that even by their time, art had quite a long history behind it. Considering all this, it is quite possible that a cultural tradition of behavioural norms originated as early as the use of tools or even earlier. The beginnings of both have been found in the chimpanzee.
Through the processes described in Chapter 5, customs and taboos may acquire the power to motivate behaviour in a way comparable to that of autonomous instincts. Not only highly developed rites or ceremonies but also simpler and less con- spicuous norms of social behaviour may attain, after a number of generations, the character of sacred customs which are loved and considered as values whose infringement is severely frowned upon by public opinion. As also has already been hinted in Chap- ter 5, sacred custom owes its motivating force to phylogenetic- ally evolved behaviour patterns of which two are of particular importance. One is the response of militant enthusiasm by which any group defends its own social norms and rites against another group not possessing them; the other is the group’s cruel taunting of any of its members who fail to conform with the accepted ‘good form’ of behaviour. Without the phylo- genetically programmed love for traditional custom human society would lack the supporting apparatus to which it owes its indispensable structure. Yet, like any phylogenetically pro- grammed behaviour mechanism, the one under discussion can miscarry. School classes or companies of soldiers, which can both be regarded as models of primitive group structure, can be very cruel indeed in their ganging up against an outsider. The purely instinctive response to a physically abnormal individual, for instance the jeering at a fat boy, is absolutely indentical, as far as overt behaviour is concerned, with discrimination against a person who differs from the group in culturally developed social norms – for instance a child who speaks a different dialect.
The ganging up against an individual diverging from the social norms characteristic of a group, and the group’s enthusi- astic readiness to defend these social norms and rites, are both good illustrations of the way in which culturally determined conditioned stimulus situations release activities which are fundamentally instinctive. They are also excellent examples of typical compound behaviour patterns whose primary survival value is as obvious as the danger of their misfiring under the conditions of the modern social order. I shall have to come back later on to the different ways in which the function of militant enthusiasm can miscarry and to possible means of preventing this eventuality.
Before enlarging on this subject, however, I must say a few words about the functions of social norms and rites in general. First of all I must recall to the reader’s memory the somewhat surprising fact, mentioned in Chapter 5: we have no immediate knowledge of the function and/or survival value of the majority of our own established customs, notwithstanding our emotional conviction that they do indeed constitute high values. This para- doxical state of affairs is explained by the simple fact that cus- toms are not man-made in the same sense as human inventions, are, from the pebble tool up to the jet plane.
There may be exceptional cases in which causal insight gained by a great lawgiver determines a social norm. Moses is said to have recognized the pig as a host of the Trichina, but if he did, he preferred to rely on the devout religious observance of his people rather than on their intellect when he asserted that Jehovah himself had declared the porker an unclean animal. In general, however, it is quite certain that it hardly ever was insight into a valuable function that gave rise to traditional norms and rites, but the age-old process of natural selection. Historians will have to face the fact that natural selection determined the evolution of cultures in the same manner as it did that of species. In both cases the great constructor has produced results which may not be the best of all conceivable solutions but which at least prove their practicability by their very existence. To the biologist who knows the ways in which selection works and who is also aware of its limitations it is in no way surprising to find, in its constructions, some details which are unnecessary or even detrimental to survival. The human mind, endowed with the power of deduction, can quite often find solutions to prob- lems which natural selection fails to resolve. Selection may produce incomplete adaptation even when it uses the material furnished by mutation and when it has huge time periods at its disposal. It is much more likely to do so when it has to deter- mine, in an incomparably shorter time, which of the randomly arising customs of a culture make it best fitted to survival. Small wonder indeed if, among the social norms and rites of any cul- ture, we find a considerable number which are unnecessary or even clearly inexpedient and which selection nevertheless has failed to eliminate. Many superstitions, comparable to my little greylag’s detour towards the window, can become institutional- ized and be carried on for generations. Also, intra-specific selection often plays as dangerous a role in the development of cultural ritualization as in phylogenesis. The process of so-called status-seeking, for instance, produces the bizarre excrescences in social norms and rites which are so typical of intra-specific
selection.
However, even if some social norms or rites are quite obvi-
ously maladaptive, this does not imply that they may be elimin- ated without further consideration. The social organization of any culture is a complicated system of universal interaction between a great many divergent traditional norms of behaviour, and it can never be predicted without a very thorough analysis what repercussions the cutting out of even one single part may have for the functioning of the whole. For instance, it is easily intelligible to anybody that the custom of head-hunting, widely spread among tropical tribes, has a somewhat unpleasant side to it, and that the peoples still adhering to it would be better off, in many ways, without it. The studies of the ethnologist and psycho-analyst Derek Freeman, however, have shown that head-hunting is so intricately interwoven with the whole social system of some Bornean tribes that its abolition tends to disinte- grate their whole culture, even seriously jeopardizing the survival of the people.
The balanced interaction between all the single norms of social behaviour characteristic of a culture accounts for the fact that it usually proves highly dangerous to mix cultures. To kill a culture it is often sufficient to bring it into contact with another, particularly if the latter is higher, or is at least regarded as higher, as the culture of a conquering nation usually is. The people of the subdued side then tend to look down upon everything they previously held sacred and to ape the customs which they regard as superior. As the system of social norms and rites characteristic of a culture is always adapted, in many particular ways, to the special conditions of its environment, this unquestioning acceptance of foreign customs almost invariably leads to mal- adaptation. Colonial history offers abundant examples of its causing the destruction not only of cultures but also of peoples and races. Even in the less tragic case of rather closely related and roughly equivalent cultures mixing there usually are some undesirable results, because each finds it easier to imitate the most superficial, least valuable customs of the other. The first items of American culture imitated by German youth immedi- ately after the last war were gum-chewing, Coca-cola drinking, the crew cut and the reading of coloured comic strips. More valuable social norms characteristic of American culture were obviously less easy to imitate.
Quite apart from the danger to one culture arising from contact with another, all systems of social norms and rites are vulnerable in the same way as systems of phylogenetically evolved patterns of social behaviour. Not being man-made, but produced by selection, their function is, without special scientific investi- gation, unknown to man himself, and therefore their balance is as easily upset by the effects of conceptual thought as that of any system of instinctive behaviour. Like the latter, they can be made to miscarry by any environmental change not ‘foreseen’ in their ‘programming’, but while instincts persist for better or worse, traditional systems of social behaviour can disappear altogether within one generation, because, like the continuous state that constitutes the life of an organism, that which constitutes a culture cannot bear any interruption of its continuity.
Several coinciding factors are at present threatening to inter- rupt the continuity of our Western culture. There is, in our cul- ture, an alarming break of traditional continuity between the generation born in about 1900 and the next. This fact is incontestable; its causes are still doubtful. Diminishing cohesion of the family group and decreasing personal contact between teacher and pupil are probably important factors. Very few of the present younger generation have ever had the opportunity of seeing their fathers at work, few pupils learn from their teachers by collaborating with them. This used to be the rule with peas- ants, artisans and even scientists, provided they taught at rela- tively small universities. The industrialization that prevails in all sectors of human life produces a distance between the genera- tions which is not compensated for by the greatest familiarity, by the most democratic tolerance and permissiveness of which we are so proud. Young people seem to be unable to accept the values held in honour by the older generation, unless they are in close contact with at least one of its representatives who commands their unrestricted respect and love.
Another probably important factor contributing to the same effect is the real obsolescence of many social norms and rites still valued by some of the older generation. The extreme speed of ecological and sociological change wrought by the development of technology causes many customs to become maladaptive within one generation. The romantic veneration of national values, so movingly expressed in the works of Rudyard Kipling or C. S. Forrester, is obviously an anachronism that can do nothing but damage today.
Such criticism is indubitably over-stressed by the prevalence of scientific thought and the unrelenting demand for causal understanding, both of which are the most characteristic, if not the only, virtues of our century. However, scientific enlighten- ment tends to engender doubt in the value of traditional beliefs long before it furnishes the causal insight necessary to decide whether some accepted custom is an obsolete superstition or a still indispensable part of a system of social norms. Again, it is the unripe fruit of the tree of knowledge that proves to be dan- gerous; indeed I suspect that the whole legend of the tree of knowledge is meant to defend sacred traditions against the premature inroads of incomplete rationalization.
As it is, we do not know enough about the function of any system of culturally ritualized norms of behaviour to give a rational answer to the perfectly rational question what some particular custom is good for, in other words wherein lies its survival value. When an innovator rebels against established norms of social behaviour and asks why he should conform with them, we are usually at a loss for an answer. It is only in rare cases, as in my example of Moses’ law against eating pigs, that we can give the would-be reformer such a succinct answer as: ‘You will get trichinosis if you don’t obey.’ In most cases the defender of accepted tradition has to resort to seemingly lame replies, saying that certain things are ‘simply not done’, are not cricket, are un-American or sinful, if he does not prefer to appeal to the authority of some venerable father-figure who also regarded the social norm under discussion as inviolable. To anyone for whom the latter is still endowed with the emo- tional value of a sacred rite, such an answer appears as self- evident and satisfactory; to anybody who has lost this feeling of reverence it sounds hollow and sanctimonious. Understandably, if not quite forgivably, such a person tends to think that the social norm in question is just superstition, if he does not go so far as to consider its defender as insincere. This, incidentally, is very frequently the main point of dissension between people of different generations.
In order correctly to appreciate how indispensable cultural rites and social norms really are, one must keep in mind that, as Arnold Gehlen has put it, contemporary man is by nature a being of culture. In other words, man’s whole system of innate activities and reactions is phylogenetically so constructed, so ‘calculated’ by evolution, as to need to be complemented by cul- tural tradition. For instance, all the tremendous neuro-sensory apparatus of human speech is phylogenetically evolved, but so constructed that its function presupposes the existence of a cul- turally developed language which the infant has to learn. The greater part of all phylogenetically evolved patterns of human social behaviour is inter-related with cultural tradition in an analogous way. The urge to become a member of a group, for instance, is certainly something that has been programmed in the pre-human phylogeny of man, but the distinctive properties of any group which make it coherent and exclusive are norms of behaviour ritualized in cultural development. As has been explained in Chapter 5, without traditional rites and customs representing a common property valued and defended by all members of the group, human beings would be quite unable to form social units exceeding in size that of the primal family group which can be held together by the instinctive bond of personal friendship discussed in Chapter 11.
The equipment of man with phylogenetically programmed norms of behaviour is just as dependent on cultural tradition and rational responsibility as, conversely, the function of both the latter is dependent on instinctual motivation (pages 239–40). Were it possible to rear a human being of normal genetical constitution under circumstances depriving it of all cultural trad- ition – which is impossible not only for ethical but also for biological reasons – the subject of the cruel experiment would be very far from representing a reconstruction of a pre-human ancestor, as yet devoid of culture. It would be a poor cripple, deficient in higher functions in a way comparable to that in which idiots who have suffered encephalitis during infantile or foetal life lack the higher functions of the cerebral cortex. No man, not even the greatest genius, could invent, all by himself, a system of social norms and rites forming a substitute for cultural tradition.
Today one has plenty of unwelcome opportunity to observe the consequences which even a partial deficiency of cultural tradition has on social behaviour. The human beings thus affected range from young people advocating necessary, if dan- gerous, abrogations of customs that have become obsolete, to angry young men and rebellious gangs of juveniles, and finally to the appearance of a certain, well-defined type of juvenile delinquent which is the same all over the world. Blind to all values, these unfortunates are the victims of infinite boredom.
The means by which an expedient compromise between the rigidity of social norms and the necessity of adaptive change can be effected is prescribed by biological laws of the widest range of application. No organic system can attain to any higher degree of differentiation without firm and cohesive structures support- ing it and holding it together. Such a structure and its support can, in principle, only be gained by the sacrifice of certain degrees of freedom that existed before. A worm can bend any- where, an arthropod only where its cuticular skeleton is pro- vided with joints for that purpose. Changes in outer or inner environment may demand degrees of freedom not permitted by the existing structure and may necessitate its partial and/or temporary disintegration, in the same way that growth necessi- tates the periodical shedding of the shell in crustacea and other arthropods. This act of demolishing carefully erected structures, though indispensable if better adapted ones are to arise, is always followed by a period of dangerous vulnerability, as is impres- sively illustrated by the defenceless situation of the newly moulted soft-shelled crab.
All this applies unrestrictedly to the ‘solidified’, that is to say institutionalized, system of social norms and rites which func- tion very much like a supporting skeleton in human cultures. In the growth of human cultures, as in that of arthropods, there is a built-in mechanism providing for graduated change. During and shortly after puberty human beings have an indubitable ten- dency to loosen their allegiance to all traditional rites and social norms of their culture, allowing conceptual thought to cast doubt on their value and to look around for new and perhaps more worthy ideals. There probably is, at that time of life, a definite sensitive period for a new object-fixation, much as in the case of the object-fixation found in animals and called imprinting. If at that critical time of life old ideals prove falla- cious under critical scrutiny and new ones fail to appear, the result is that complete aimlessness, the utter boredom which characterizes the young delinquent. If, on the other hand, the clever demagogue, well versed in the dangerous art of producing supra-normal stimulus situations, gets hold of young people at the susceptible age, he finds it easy to guide their object-fixation in a direction subservient to his political aims. At the post- puberal age some human beings seem to be driven by an over- powering urge to espouse a cause, and, failing to find a worthy one, may become fixated on astonishingly inferior substitutes. The instinctive need to be the member of a closely knit group fighting for common ideals may grow so strong that it becomes inessential what these ideals are and whether they possess any intrinsic value. This, I believe, explains the formation of juvenile gangs whose social structure is very probably a rather close reconstruction of that prevailing in primitive human society.
Apparently this process of object-fixation can take its full effect only once in an individual’s life. Once the valuation of certain social norms or the allegiance to a certain cause is fully established, it cannot be erased again, at least not to the extent of making room for a new, equally strong one. Also it would seem that once the sensitive period has elapsed, a man’s ability to embrace ideals at all is considerably reduced. All this helps to explain the hackneyed truth that human beings have to live through a rather dangerous period at and shortly after puberty. The tragic paradox is that the danger is greatest for those who are by nature best fitted to serve the noble cause of humanity.
The process of object-fixation has consequences of an import- ance that can hardly be overestimated. It determines neither more nor less than that which a man will live for, struggle for and, under certain circumstances, blindly go to war for. It determines the conditioned stimulus situation releasing a powerful phylogenetically evolved behaviour which I propose to call that of militant enthusiasm.
Militant enthusiasm is particularly suited for the paradigmatic illustration of the manner in which a phylogenetically evolved pattern of behaviour interacts with culturally ritualized social norms and rites, and in which, though absolutely indispensable to the function of the compound system, it is prone to miscarry most tragically if not strictly controlled by rational responsibility based on causal insight. The Greek word enthousiasmos implies that a person is possessed by a god, the German word Begeisterung means that he is controlled by a spirit, a Geist, more or less holy.
In reality, militant enthusiasm is a specialized form of com- munal aggression, clearly distinct from and yet functionally related to the more primitive forms of petty individual aggres- sion. Every man of normally strong emotions knows, from his own experience, the subjective phenomena that go hand in hand with the response of militant enthusiasm. A shiver runs down the back, and, as more exact observation shows, along the out- side of both arms. One soars elated above all the ties of everyday life, one is ready to abandon all for the call of what, in the moment of this specific emotion, seems to be a sacred duty. All obstacles in its path become unimportant, the instinctive inhibi- tions against hurting or killing one’s fellows lose, unfortunately, much of their power. Rational considerations, criticism, and all reasonable arguments against the behaviour dictated by militant enthusiasm are silenced by an amazing reversal of all values, making them appear not only untenable but base and dis- honourable. Men may enjoy the feeling of absolute righteous- ness even while they commit atrocities. Conceptual thought and moral responsibility are at their lowest ebb. As a Ukrainian proverb says: ‘When the banner is unfurled, all reason is in the trumpet.’
The subjective experiences just described are correlated with the following, objectively demonstrable phenomena. The tone of the entire striated musculature is raised, the carriage is stiff- ened, the arms are raised from the sides and slightly rotated inwards so that the elbows point outwards. The head is proudly raised, the chin stuck out, and the facial muscles mime the ‘hero face’, familiar from the films. Down the back and along the outer surface of the arms the hair stands on end. This is the objectively observed aspect of the shiver!
Anybody who has ever seen the corresponding behaviour of the male chimpanzee defending his band or family with self- sacrificing courage, will doubt the purely spiritual character of human enthusiasm. The chimp, too, sticks out his chin, stiffens his body, and raises his elbows; his hair stands on end producing a terrifying magnification of his body contours as seen from the front. The inward rotation of his arms obviously has the purpose of turning the longest-haired side outwards to enhance the effect. The whole combination of body attitude and hair-raising constitutes a bluff. This is also seen when a cat humps its back, and is calculated to make the animal appear bigger and more dangerous than it really is. Our shiver which, in German poetry, is called a heiliger Schauer, which means a ‘holy shiver’, turns out to be the vestige of a pre-human vegetative response of causing to bristle a fur which we no longer have.
To the humble seeker of biological truth there cannot be the slightest doubt that human militant enthusiasm evolved out of a communal defence response of our pre-human ancestors. The unthinking single-mindedness of the response must have been of high survival value even in a tribe of fully evolved human beings. It was necessary for the individual male to forget all his other allegiances in order to be able to dedicate himself, body and soul, to the cause of the communal battle. ‘Was schert mich Weib, was schert mich Kind’ – ‘What do I care for wife or child’ says the Napoleonic soldier in a famous poem by Heinrich Heine, and it is highly characteristic of the reaction that this poet, otherwise a caustic critic of emotional romanticism, was so unreservedly enraptured by his enthusiasm for the ‘great’ conqueror as to find this supremely apt expression.
The object which militant enthusiasm tends to defend has changed with cultural development. Originally it was certainly the community of concrete, individually known members of a group, held together by the bond of personal love and friend- ship. With the growth of the social unit, the social norms and rites held in common by all its members became the main factor holding it together as an entity, and therewith they became automatically the symbol of the unit. By a process of true Pavlo- vian conditioning plus a certain amount of irreversible imprint- ing these rather abstract values have in every human culture been substituted for the primal, concrete object of the communal defence reaction.
This traditionally conditioned substitution of object has important consequences for the function of militant enthusiasm.

On the one hand, the abstract nature of its object can give it a definitely inhuman aspect and make it positively dangerous – what do I care for wife or child? – on the other hand, it makes it possible to recruit militant enthusiasm into the service of really ethical values. Without the concentrated dedication of militant enthusiasm neither art, nor science, nor indeed any of the great endeavours of humanity would ever have come into being. Whether enthusiasm is made to serve these endeavours, or whether man’s most powerfully motivating instinct makes him go to war in some abjectly silly cause, depends almost entirely on the conditioning and/or imprinting he has undergone dur- ing certain susceptible periods of his life. There is reasonable hope that our moral responsibility may gain control over the primeval drive, but our only hope of it ever doing so rests on the humble recognition of the fact that militant enthusiasm is an instinctive response with a phylogenetically determined releas- ing mechanism, and that the only point at which intelligent and responsible supervision can get control is in the conditioning of the response to an object which proves to be a genuine value under the scrutiny of the categorical question.
Like the triumph ceremony of the greylag goose, militant enthusiasm in man is a true autonomous instinct: it has its own appetitive behaviour, its own releasing mechanisms and, like the sexual urge or any other strong instinct, it engenders a specific feeling of intense satisfaction. The strength of its seductive lure explains why intelligent men may behave as irrationally and immorally in their political as in their sexual lives. Like the tri- umph ceremony it has an essential influence on the social struc- ture of the species. Humanity is not enthusiastically combative because it is split into political parties, but it is divided into opposing camps because this is the adequate stimulus situation to arouse militant enthusiasm in a satisfying manner. ‘If ever a doctrine of universal salvation should gain ascendancy over the whole earth to the exclusion of all others,’ writes Erich von Holst, ‘it would at once fall into two strongly opposing factions (one’s own true one and the other heretical one) and hostility and war would thrive as before, mankind being – unfortunately – what it is!’
The first prerequisite for rational control of an instinctive behaviour pattern is the knowledge of the stimulus situation which releases it. Militant enthusiasm can be elicited, with the predictability of a reflex, when the following environmental situations arise. First of all, a social unit with which the subject identifies himself must appear to be threatened by some danger from outside. That which is threatened may be a concrete group of people, the family, or a little community of close friends, or else it may be a larger social unit held together and symbolized by its own specific social norms and rites. As the latter assume the character of autonomous values, in the way described in Chapter 5, they can, quite by themselves, represent the object in whose defence militant enthusiasm can be elicited. From all this it follows that this response can be brought into play in the service of extremely different objects, ranging from the sports club to the nation, or from the most obsolete manner- isms or ceremonials to the ideal of scientific truth or of the incorruptibility of justice.
A second key stimulus which contributes enormously to the releasing of intense militant enthusiasm is the presence of a hateful enemy from whom the threat to the above ‘values’ emanates. This enemy, too, can be of a concrete or of an abstract nature. It can be ‘the’ Jews, Huns, Boches, Tyrants, etc., or abstract concepts like world capitalism, bolshevism, fascism and any other kind of ism; it can be heresy, dogmatism, scientific fallacy or what not. Just as in the case of the object to be defended, the enemy against whom to defend it is extremely variable and demagogues are well versed in the dangerous art of producing supra-normal dummies to release a very dangerous form of militant enthusiasm.

A third factor contributing to the environmental situation eliciting the response is an inspiring leader figure. Even the most emphatically anti-fascistic ideologies apparently cannot do without it, as the giant pictures of leaders displayed by all kinds of political parties prove clearly enough. Again the unselectivity of the phylogenetically programmed response allows for a wide variation in the conditioning to a leader-figure. Napoleon, about whom so critical a man as Heinrich Heine became so enthusiastic, does not inspire me in the least: Charles Darwin does.
A fourth, and perhaps the most important prerequisite for the full eliciting of militant enthusiasm is the presence of many other individuals all agitated by the same emotion. Their abso- lute number has a certain influence on the quality of the response. Smaller numbers at issue with a large majority tend to obstinate defence with the emotional value of ‘making a last stand’, while very large numbers inspired by the same enthusi- asm feel an urge to conquer the whole world in the name of their sacred cause. Here the laws of mass enthusiasm are strictly analogous to those of flock formation described in Chapter 8; here, too, the excitation grows in proportion, perhaps even in geometrical progression, with the increasing number of indi- viduals. This is exactly what makes militant mass enthusiasm so dangerous.
I have tried to describe, with as little emotional bias as possible, the human response of enthusiasm, its phylogenetic origin, its instinctive as well as its traditionally handed-down components and prerequisites. I hope I have made the reader realize, without actually saying so, what a jumble our philo- sophy of values is. What is a culture? A system of historically developed social norms and rites which are passed on from generation to generation because emotionally they are felt to be values. What is a value? Obviously, normal and healthy people are able to appreciate something as a high value for which to live and, if necessary, to die, for no other reason than that it was evolved in cultural ritualization and handed down to them by a revered elder. Is, then, a value only defined as the object on which our instinctive urge to preserve and defend traditional social norms has become fixated? Primarily and in the early stages of cultural development this undoubtedly was the case. The obvious advantages of loyal adherence to tradition must have exerted a considerable selection pressure. However, the greatest loyalty and obedience to culturally ritualized norms of behaviour must not be mistaken for responsible morality. Even at their best they are only functionally analogous to behaviour controlled by rational responsibility. In this respect they are no whit different from the instinctive patterns of social behaviour discussed in Chapter 7. Also they are just as prone to mis- carry under circumstances for which they have not been ‘programmed’ by the great constructor, natural selection.
In other words, the need to control, by wise rational responsi- bility, all our emotional allegiances to cultural values is as great as, if not greater than, the necessity of keeping our other instincts in check. None of them can ever have such devastating effects as unbridled militant enthusiasm when it infects great masses and overrides all other considerations by its single- mindedness and its specious nobility. It is not enthusiasm in itself that is in any way noble, but humanity’s great goals which it can be called upon to defend. That indeed is the Janus head of man: the only being capable of dedicating himself to the very highest moral and ethical values requires for this purpose a phylogenetically adapted mechanism of behaviour whose ani- mal properties bring with them the danger that he will kill his brother, convinced that he is doing so in the interests of these very same high values. Ecce homo!
