AVOWAL OF OPTIMISM

Ich bilde mir nicht ein, ich könnte was lehren Die Menschen zu bessern und zu bekehren.1
goethe
I do not mind admitting that, unlike Faust, I think I have some- thing to teach mankind that may help it to change for the better. This conviction is not as presumptuous as it might seem; it is certainly less so than the opposite attitude which is usually based not so much on a man’s distrust of his capacity to teach, as on the haughty assumption that humanity is not ready to under- stand the profound truths of his new doctrine. This is true only in those very rare instances when an intellectual giant is cen- turies ahead of his time. He is misunderstood and runs the risk either of becoming a martyr or of being brushed aside as a crank. If his contemporaries pay attention to a teacher or even read his books, it can safely be assumed that he is not an intellectual giant. At best he can flatter himself that he has some- thing to say that is ‘due’ to be said at that moment. His teachings will be most efficacious if his ideas are only a short head in front of his hearers. A new truth has really convinced when the hearer exclaims, ‘How silly of me not to have thought of that,’ as Thomas Huxley is reported to have said on reading Charles Darwin’s Origin of Species.
I am really being far from presumptuous when I profess my conviction that in the very near future not only scientists but the majority of tolerably intelligent people will consider as an obvi- ous and banal truth all that has been said in this book about instincts in general and intra-specific aggression in particular; about phylogenetic and cultural ritualization, and about the fac- tors that build up the ever-increasing danger of human society’s becoming completely disintegrated by the misfunctioning of social behaviour patterns.
There is less hazard of my meeting with disbelief than of incurring the reproach of banality when I now proceed to sum- marize the most important inferences from what has been said in this book by formulating simple precepts for preventive measures against that danger. I am aware that these measures must appear feeble and ineffective after all I have said in the last chapter about the present situation of mankind. This, however, does not argue against the correctness of my inferences. In medi- cine, too, all therapeutic measures appear slight and ineffectual when compared with the amount of physiological and patho- logical knowledge and insight that had to be gained before any reasonable therapy at all could be planned. Science seldom effects dramatic changes in the course of history, except, of course, in the sense of destruction, for it is all too easy to misuse the power afforded by causal insight. To use the knowledge gained by scientific research in a creative and beneficial fashion demands no less perspicacity and meticulous application to detail than were necessary to gain it.

The first, the most obvious and the most important precept is the old γνωθι σεαυτ ν, ‘know thyself’: we must deepen our insight into the causal concatenations governing our own behaviour. The lines along which an applied science of human behaviour will probably develop are just beginning to appear. One line is the objective, ethological investigation of all the pos- sibilities of discharging aggression in its primal form on substi- tute objects, and we already know that there are better ones than kicking empty carbide tins. The second is the psycho-analytical study of so-called sublimation. We may anticipate that a deeper knowledge of this specifically human form of catharsis will do much towards the relief of undischarged aggressive drives. The third way of avoiding aggression, though an obvious one, is still worth mentioning: it is the promotion of personal acquaintance and, if possible, friendship between individual members of dif- ferent ideologies or nations. The fourth and perhaps the most important measure to be taken immediately is the intelligent and responsible channelling of militant enthusiasm, in other words helping a younger generation which, on the one hand, is highly critical and even suspicious and on the other emotionally starved, to find genuine causes that are worth serving in the modern world. I shall now proceed to discuss all these precepts one by one.
Even at its present modest stage, our knowledge of the nature of aggression is sufficient to tell us what measures against its damaging effects have no hope of success whatever, and this in itself is of value. To anybody who is unaware of the essential spontaneity of instinctive drives and who is wont to think of behaviour exclusively in the terms of conditioned and unconditioned responses, it must seem a hopeful undertaking to diminish or even eliminate aggression by shielding mankind from all stimulus situations eliciting aggressive behaviour. The results of this experiment have already been discussed in Chapter 4. Another hopeless attempt is to control aggression by putting a moral veto on it. The practical application of both these methods would be about as judicious as trying to counteract the increas- ing pressure in a continuously heated boiler by screwing down the safety valve more tightly.
A further, theoretically possible but in my opinion highly inadvisable measure would be to attempt to breed out the aggressive drive by eugenic planning. We know from the pre- ceeding chapters that there is intra-specific aggression in the human reaction of enthusiasm and this, though dangerous, is nevertheless indispensable for the achievement of the highest human goals. We know from the chapter, ‘The Bond’, that aggression in very many animals and probably also in man is an essential component of personal friendship. Finally, in the chap- ter on the great parliament of instincts, we have learned how complex is the interaction of different drives. It would have quite unpredictable consequences if one of them – and one of the strongest – were to disappear entirely. We do not know how many important behaviour patterns of man include aggression as a motivating factor, but I believe it occurs in a great many. What is certain, is that with the elimination of aggression, the aggredi in the original and widest sense, the tackling of a task or problem, the self-respect without which everything that a man does from morning till evening, from the morning shave to the sublimest artistic or scientific creations, would lose all impetus; everything associated with ambition, ranking order, and countless other equally indispensable behaviour patterns would probably also disappear from human life. In the same way, a very important and specifically human faculty would probably disappear too: laughter.
The most promising means we can apply in our attempt to cope with the miscarrying of aggression – and that of other patterns of social behaviour – are those which have proved their efficiency in the course of phylogenetical and cultural evolution.
A simple and effective way of discharging aggression in an innocuous manner is to redirect it at a substitute object. As explained in Chapter 11, this method has been employed exten- sively by the great constructors of evolution to prevent combat between members of a group. It is sound reason for optimism that aggression, more easily than most other instincts, can find complete satisfaction with substitute objects. Even without insight into the consequences of dammed-up drives, the choice of object is directed by reasonable considerations. I have found that even highly irascible people who, in a rage, seem to lose all control of their actions, still refrain from smashing really valu- able objects, preferring cheaper crockery. Yet it would be a com- plete error to suspect that they could, if they only tried hard enough, keep from smashing things altogether! Insight into the physiology of dammed-up drive and its redirected discharge is, of course, a great help in governing aggression. It was certainly thanks to this insight that, in the incident related in Chapter 4, I did not hit my friend but jumped on an empty carbide tin; conversely, the reason that my old aunt, described in the same chapter, was so completely convinced of the depravity of her unfortunate housemaid, was simply that she knew nothing of these phenomena. My dear old aunt was emphatically not my inferior in respect to moral self-control. Thus the differences in our behaviour furnish a striking illustration of the fact that insight into the causality of our actions may endow our moral responsibility with the power to control them, even where the categorical imperative is doomed to fail miserably without that knowledge.
Redirection as a means of controlling the functions of aggression and other undischarged drives has been known to humanity for a long time. The ancient Greeks were familiar with the conception of catharsis, of purifying discharge, and psychoanalysis has shown very convincingly that many patterns of altogether laudable behaviour derive their impulses from the ‘sublimation’ of aggressive or sexual drives. Sublimation, however, must not be confounded with simple redirection of an instinctive activity towards a substitute object. There is a sub- stantial difference between the man who bangs the table instead of hitting his antagonist, and the man who discharges the aggression aroused by an irritating family life by writing an enthusiastic pamphlet serving an altogether unconnected cause.
One of the many instances in which phylogenetic and cultural ritualization have hit on very similar solutions of the same prob- lem, concerns the method by which both have achieved the difficult task of avoiding killing without destroying the import- ant functions performed by fighting in the interest of the species. All the culturally evolved norms of ‘fair fighting’, from primitive chivalry to the Geneva Convention, are functionally analogous to phylogenetically ritualized combat in animals.
Sport probably originated from highly ritualized, but still serious hostile fighting. It can be defined as a specifically human form of non-hostile combat, governed by the strictest of cultur- ally developed rules. Sport is not directly comparable to the fight- ing play of the higher vertebrates. The latter is never competitive, being essentially free from any appetitive or purposive tension. The enjoyable play of two dogs, however different in size and strength, is made possible only by the strict exclusion of all competitive elements. In sport, on the other hand, even in those kinds in which the enjoyment of skilled movements for their own sake predominates, as in ski-ing or skating, there is always a certain pride in doing it well and there is no sport in which contests are not held. In this respect human sport is more akin to serious fighting than animal play is; also, sport indubitably con- tains aggressive motivation, demonstrably absent in most animal play.
While some early forms of sport, like the jousting of medieval knights, may have had an appreciable influence on sexual selec- tion, the main function of sport today lies in the cathartic discharge of aggressive urge; besides that, of course, it is of the greatest importance in keeping people healthy.
The value of sport, however, is much greater than that of a simple outlet of aggression in its coarser and more individual- istic behaviour patterns, like pummelling a punch-ball. It edu- cates man to a conscious and responsible control of his own fighting behaviour. Few lapses of self-control are punished as immediately and severely as loss of temper during a boxing bout. More valuable still is the educational value of the restrictions imposed by the demands for fairness and chivalry which must be respected even in the face of the strongest aggression-eliciting stimuli.
The most important function of sport lies in furnishing a healthy safety valve for that most indispensable and, at the same time, most dangerous form of aggression that I have described in the preceding chapter as collective militant enthusiasm. The Olympic Games are virtually the only occasion when the anthem of one nation can be played without arousing any hostility against another. This is so because the sportman’s dedication to the international social norms of his sport, to the ideals of chiv- alry and fair play, are equal to any national enthusiasm. The team spirit inherent in all international sport gives scope to a number of truly valuable patterns of social behaviour which are essen- tially motivated by aggression and which, in all probability, have evolved under the selection pressure of tribal warfare at the very dawn of culture. The noble warrior’s typical virtues, such as his readiness to sacrifice himself in the service of a common cause, disciplined submission to the rank order of the group, mutual aid in the face of deadly danger, and above all, a superlatively strong bond of friendship between men, were obviously indispensable if a small tribe of the type we have to assume for early man was to survive in competition with others. All these virtues are still desirable in modern man and still command our instinctive respect. It is undeniable that there is no situation in which all these virtues shine so brilliantly as they do in war, a fact which is dangerously liable to convince quite excellent but naïve people that war, after all, cannot be the absolutely abhorrent thing it really is.
Fortunately there are other ways in which the above- mentioned, admittedly valuable, virtues can be cultivated. The harder and more dangerous forms of sport, particularly those demanding the working together of larger groups, such as mountain climbing, diving, off-shore and ocean sailing, but also other dangerous undertakings, like polar expeditions and, above all, the exploration of space, all give scope for militant enthusi- asm, allowing nations to fight each other in hard and dangerous competition without engendering national or political hatred. On the contrary, I am convinced that of all the people on the two sides of the great curtain the space pilots are the least likely to hate each other. Like the late Erich von Holst, I believe that the tremendous and otherwise not quite explicable public interest in space flight arises from the subconscious realization that it helps to preserve peace. May it continue to do so!
Sporting contests between nations are beneficial not only because they provide an outlet for the collective militant enthusiasm of nations, but also because they have two other effects that counter the danger of war: they promote personal acquaintance between people of different nations or parties and they unite, in enthusiasm for a common cause, people who otherwise would have little in common. We must now discuss how these two measures against aggression work, and by what means they can be exploited to serve our purpose.
I have already said that we can learn much from demagogues who pursue the opposite purpose, namely to make peoples fight. They know very well that personal acquaintance, indeed every kind of brotherly feeling for the people to be attacked, consti- tutes a strong obstacle to aggression. Every militant ideology in history has propagated the belief that the members of the other party are not quite human and every strategist is intent on pre- venting any ‘fraternization’ between the soldiers in confronting trenches. Anonymity of the person to be attacked greatly facili- tates the releasing of aggressive behaviour. It is an observation familiar to anybody who has travelled in trains that wellbred people behave atrociously towards strangers in the territorial defence of their compartment. When they discover that the intruder is an acquaintance, however casual, there is an amazing and ridiculous switch in their behaviour from extreme rudeness to exaggerated and shamefaced politeness. Similarly, a naïve per- son can feel quite genuine hatred for an anonymous group, against ‘the’ Germans, ‘the’ catholic foreigners, etc., etc., and may rail against them in public, but he will never dream of being so much as impolite when he comes face to face with an indi- vidual member. On closer acquaintance with one or more mem- bers of the abhorred group such a person will rarely revise his judgement on it as a whole, but will explain his sympathy for individuals by the assumption that they are exceptions to the rule.
If mere acquaintance has this remarkable and altogether desirable effect, it is not surprising that real friendship between individuals of different nationality or ideology are even more beneficial. No one is able to hate, wholeheartedly, a nation amongst whose numbers he has several friends. Being friends with a few ‘samples’ of another people is enough to awaken a healthy mistrust of all those generalizations which brand ‘the’ Russians, English, Germans, etc., etc., with typical and usually hateful national characteristics. To the best of my belief, my friend Walter Robert Corti was the first to put into practice the method of subduing international hatred by promoting inter- national friendships. In his famous children’s village in Trogen in Switzerland, children and young people of all kinds of nations are living together in a friendly community. May this attempt find imitators on a grand scale!

What is needed is the arousal of enthusiasm for causes which are commonly recognized as values of the highest order by all human beings, irrespective of their national, cultural or political allegiances. I have already called attention to the danger of defin- ing a value by begging the question. A value is emphatically not just the object to which the instinctive response of militant enthusiasm becomes fixated by imprinting and early condition- ing, even if, conversely, militant enthusiasm can become fixated on practically any institutionalized social norm or rite and make it appear as a value. Emotional loyalty to an institutionalized norm does not make it a value, otherwise war, even modern technical war, would be one. J. Marmor has quite recently called attention to the fact that even today, ‘the history books of every nation justify its wars as brave, righteous and honourable. This glorification is charged with overtones of patriotism and love of country. Virtues such as heroism and courage are regarded as being “manly” and are traditionally associated with waging war. Conversely, the avoidance of war or the pursuit of peace are generally regarded as “effeminate”, passive, cowardly, weak, dishonourable or subversive. The brutal realities, even of tradi- tional war, are glamourized and obscured by countless tales of heroism and glory, and the warnings of an occasional General Sherman that “war is hell (and) its glory all moonshine” are disregarded’. I could not agree more with Dr Marmor when he discusses the psychological obstacles to the elimination of war as a social institution and counts among them the insidious effect of military toys and war games which all prepare the soil for a psychological acceptance of war and violence. I agree with Dr Marmor’s assertion that modern war has become an institution and I share his optimism in believing that, being an institution, war can be abolished.
However, I think we must face the fact that militant enthusi- asm has evolved from the hackle-raising and chin-protruding communal defence instinct of our pre-human ancestors and that the key stimulus situations which release it still bear all the ear- marks of this origin. Among them, the existence of an enemy, against whom to defend cultural values, is still one of the most effective. Militant enthusiasm, in one particular respect, is dan- gerously akin to the triumph ceremony of geese and to analo- gous instinctive behaviour patterns of other animals. The social bond embracing a group is closely connected with aggression directed against outsiders. In human beings, too, the feeling of togetherness which is so essential to the serving of a common cause is greatly enhanced by the presence of a definite, threaten- ing enemy whom it is possible to hate. Also, it is much easier to make people identify with a simple and concrete common cause than with an abstract idea. For all these reasons, the teachers of militant ideologies have an enviably easy job in converting young people. We must face the fact that in Russia as well as in China the younger generation knows perfectly well what it is fighting for, while in our culture it is casting about in vain for causes worth embracing. The way in which huge numbers of young Americans have recently identified themselves with the rights of the American Negro is a glorious exception, though the fervour with which they have done so tends to accentuate the prevalent lack of militant enthusiasm for other equally just and equally important causes – such as the prevention of war in general. The actual warmonger, of course, has the best chances of arousing militant enthusiasm because he can always work his dummy or fiction of an enemy for all it is worth.
In all these respects the defender of peace is at a decided disadvantage. Everything he lives and works for, all the high goals at which he aims are, or should be, determined by moral responsibility which presupposes quite a lot of knowledge and real insight. Nobody can get really enthusiastic about them without considerable erudition. The one and only unquestion- able value that can be appreciated independently of rational morality or education is the bond of human love and friendship from which all kindness and charity springs, and which represents the great antithesis to aggression. In fact, love and friendship come far nearer to typifying all that is good, than aggression, which is only mistakenly identified with a destructive death drive, comes to exemplifying all that is evil.
The champion of peace is debarred from inventing a sort of dummy figure of evil for the purpose of arousing the militant enthusiasm or strengthening the bond between the fighters for the good cause. To attack just ‘evil’ is a questionable procedure, even with intelligent people. Evil, by definition, is that which endangers the good, and the good is that which we perceive as a value. Since for the scientist knowledge represents the highest of all values, he sees the lowest of all negative values in everything that impedes its progress. In my own case the dangerous whis- pering of my aggression drive would probably persuade me to see the personification of evil in some philosophers who despise natural science, particularly in those who, for purely ideological reasons, refuse to believe in evolution. If I did not know all that I do about aggression and the compulsion of militant enthusiasm, I should perhaps be in danger of letting myself be inveigled into a religious war against anti-evolutionists. In other words, we had better dispense with the personification of evil, because it leads, all too easily, to the most dangerous kind of war: religious war.
If I have just said that considerable erudition is necessary for anyone to grasp the real values of humanity which are worthy of being served and defended, I certainly did not mean that it was a hopeless task to raise the education of average humanity to that level, I only wanted to emphasize that it was necessary to do so. Indeed, in our age of enlightenment, human beings of average intelligence are not so very far from appreciating real cultural and ethical values. There are at least three great human enter- prises, collective in the truest sense of the word, whose ultimate and unconditional value no normal human being can doubt: Art, the pursuit of beauty; Science, the pursuit of truth; and, as an independent third which is neither art not science, though it makes use of both, Medicine, the attempt to mitigate human suffering.
Not even the most ruthlessly daring demagogues have ever undertaken to proclaim the whole art of an enemy nation or political party as entirely worthless. No normal educated human being can help appreciating the art of another culture however much he finds abhorrent in it in other respects. In addition, painting and music are unhindered by language bar- riers and are thus able to tell people on one side of a cultural barrier that on its other side, too, there are human beings serving the good and the beautiful. The universal appreciation of Negro music is perhaps an important step towards the solu- tion of the burning racial problem in America. After Negroes had been robbed of their freedom and after their own cultural traditions had been successfully extinguished, racial pride and prejudice have done their best, or to be more exact their worst, to prevent them from entering into the spirit and acquiring the basic social norms of western culture. The only great cultural value which they were not prevented from mak- ing wholly their own was music. The indubitable creative power of Negro composers and musicians casts a strong doubt, to say the least, on the alleged lack of cultural creativity of their race.
Art is called upon to create supra-national, supra-political values that cannot be denied by any narrowly national or polit- ical group. It turns traitor to its great mission when it allows itself to be harnessed to any political aim whatsoever. Propagand- ist tendency in any art, in poetry or in painting, means its final desecration and is altogether evil. Music, though supremely cap- able of whipping up militant enthusiasm, is fortunately quite unable to specify what the hearers are expected to get enthusi- astic about. So the most feudalistic old aristocrat can appreciate the inspiring beauty of the Marseillaise, even though the text of the song suggests that his impure blood should be used as a fertilizer – ‘d’un sang impur abreuvez nos sillons’.
Science, which is closely akin to art in many other respects also, shares its mission of creating a value that no one can deny regardless of his national or political allegiance. Unlike art, sci- ence can only be communicated by language and the truth of its results does not impress as immediately as the beauty of a work of art. On the other hand, opinions concerning the relative value of works of art may differ and though the true and the false may also be distinguished in art, these words have a very different meaning when applied to the results of scientific research. Truth, in science, can be defined as the working hypothesis best fitted to open the way to the next better one. The scientist knows very well that he is approaching ultimate truth only in an asymptotic curve and is barred from ever reaching it; but at the same time he is proudly aware of being indeed able to determine whether a statement is a nearer or less near approach to truth. This determination is not furnished by any personal opinion nor by the authority of an individual, but by further research proceed- ing by rules universally accepted by all men of all cultures and all political affiliations. More than any other product of human culture scientific knowledge is the collective property of all mankind.
Scientific truth is universal, because it is only discovered by the human brain and not made by it, as art is; even philosophy is certainly nothing other than poetry in the original sense of the word which is derived from the Greek verb ποεν, to make. Scientific truth is wrested from a reality existing outside and independent of the human brain. Since this reality is the same for all human beings, all correct scientific results will always agree with each other, in whatever national or political sur- roundings they may be gained. Should a scientist, in the con- scious or even unconscious wish to make his results agree with his political doctrine, falsify or colour the result of his work, be it ever so slightly, reality will put in an insuperable veto: these particular results will simply fail on practical application. For example, there was, a few years ago, a school of genetics in the Soviet Union which, from political and, I hope and believe, unconscious reasons, asserted that it had demonstrated the inheritance of acquired characters. These results could not be confirmed anywhere else in the world, and the situation was deeply disturbing to those who believe in the unity of science and its world-embracing mission. There is no more talk of this theory now; geneticists all over the world are again of one opinion. A small victory, indeed, but a victory for truth!
I need not say anything about the general recognition of the value of medicine. The sanctity of the Red Cross is about the only one of the laws of nations that has always been more or less respected by all nations.
Of course, education alone, in the sense of the simple trans- mission of knowledge, is only a prerequisite to the real appreci- ation of these and other ethical values. Another condition, quite as important, is that this knowledge and its ethical consequences should be handed down to the younger generation in such a way that it is able to identify itself with these values. I have already said what psycho-analysts have known for a long time, that a relation of trust and respect between two generations must exist in order to make a tradition of values possible. I have already said that Western culture, even without the danger of nuclear war- fare, is more directly threatened by disintegration because of its failure to transmit its cultural and even its ethical values to the younger generation. To many people, and probably to all of those actively concerned with politics, my hope of improving the chances of permanent peace by arousing, in young people, militant enthusiasm for the ideals of art, science, medicine and the like, will appear unrealistic to the point of being fatuous. Young people today, they will argue, are notoriously material- istic and take an insuperably sceptical view of ideals in general and in particular of those that arouse the enthusiasm of a mem- ber of the older generation. My answer is that this is quite true, but that young people today have excellent excuses for taking this attitude. Cultural and political ideas today have a way of becoming obsolete surprisingly fast; indeed there are few of them on either side of any curtain that have not already done so. To the extra-terrestrial observer, in whose place we should be trying to put ourselves, it would seem a very minor issue whether capitalism or communism will rule the world; since the differences between the two are rapidly decreasing anyhow. To such an observer the great questions would be, first, whether mankind can keep its planet from becoming too radio-active to support life, and secondly whether mankind will succeed in preventing its population from ‘exploding’ in a way more annihilating than the explosion of the Bomb. Apart from the obvious obsolescence of most so-called ideals, we know some of the reasons why the younger generation refuses to accept handed down customs and social norms (pages 254–6). I believe that the ‘angry young men’ of Western civilization have a perfectly good right to be angry with the older generation and I do not regard it as surprising if modern youth is sceptical to the point of nihilism. I believe that its mistrust of all ideals is largely due to the fact that there have been and still are so many arti- ficially contrived pseudo-ideals ‘on the market’, calculated to arouse enthusiasm for demagogic purposes.
I believe that among the genuine values here discussed science has a particular mission in vanquishing this distrust. Honest research must produce identical results anywhere. The verifi- ability of science proves the honesty of its work. There is no mystery whatsoever about its results; where they are met with obstinate incredulity they can be proved by incontestable figures. I believe that the most materialistic and the most sceptical are the very people whose enthusiasm could be aroused in the service of scientific truth and all that goes with it. Of course, it is not to be suggested that all of the earth’s population should engage in active scientific research, but scien- tific education might very well become general enough to exert a decisive influence on the social norms approved by public opinion. I am not speaking, at the moment, of the influence which a deeper understanding of the biological laws governing our own behaviour might have, a subject I shall discuss later on, but of the beneficial effect of scientific education in general. The discipline of scientific thinking rarely fails to imbue a good man not only with a certain ingrained habit of being honest, but also with a high appreciation of the value of scientific truth in itself. Scientific truth is one of the best causes for which a man can fight, and although, being based on irreducible fact, it may seem less inspiring than the beauty of art or some of the older ideals possessing the glamour of myth and romance, it surpasses all others in being incontestable, and absolutely independent of cultural, national and political allegiances.
Enthusiastic identification with any value that is ethical in the sense that its content will stand the test of Kant’s categorical question, will act as an antidote to national or political aggres- sion. Dr J. Hollo, an American physician, has pointed out that the militant enthusiasm by which a man identifies himself with a national or political cause, is so dangerous mainly for the one reason that it excludes all other considerations the moment it is aroused (by the mental processes described on pages 259–60). A man really can feel ‘wholly American’ when thinking of ‘the’ Russians or vice versa. The single-mindedness with which enthusiasm eliminates all other considerations and the fact that the objects of identification happen, in this case, to be fighting units, make national and political enthusiasm actually dangerous, to the point of its being ethically questionable.
Continuing Dr Hollo’s argument, let us suppose that a man, whatever his political or national allegiance, also identifies with ideals other than national or political. Supposing that, being a patriot of my home country (which I am) I felt an unmitigated hostility against another country (which I emphatically do not) I still could not wish wholeheartedly for its destruction if I real- ized that there were people living in it who, like myself, were enthusiastic workers in the field of inductive natural science, or revered Charles Darwin and were enthusiastically propagating the truth of his discoveries, or still others who shared my appreciation of Michelangelo’s art, or my enthusiasm for Goethe’s Faust, or for the beauty of a coral reef, or for wildlife preservation or a number of minor enthusiasms I could name. I should find it quite impossible to hate, unreservedly, any enemy, if he shared only one of my identifications with cultural and ethical values.
Obviously, the number of cultural and ethical ideals with which people are able to identify irrespective of their national or political allegiance will be in direct proportion to their reluctance to follow the urge of singleminded national or polit- ical enthusiasm. It is only the education of all humanity that can increase the number of ideals with which every individual can identify. In this manner, education would become ‘humanistic’ in a new and wider sense of the word.
Humanistic ideals of this kind must become real and full- blooded enough to compete, in the esteem of young people, with all the romantic and glamorous stimulus situations which are, primarily, much more effective in releasing the old hackle-raising and chin-protruding response of militant enthusiasm. Much intelligence and insight, on the side of the educator as well as on that of the educated, will be needed before this great goal is reached. Indeed, a certain academic dryness, unavoidably inherent in humanistic ideals, might for ever prevent average humanity from recognizing their value, were it not that they have for their ally a heaven-sent gift of man that is anything but dry, a faculty as specifically human as speech or moral responsibility: humour. In its highest forms, it appears to be specially evolved to give us the power of sifting the true from the false. G. K. Chesterton has voiced the altogether novel opinion that the religion of the future will be based, to a considerable extent, on a more highly developed and differentiated, subtle form of humour. Though, in this formulation, the idea may appear somewhat exaggerated, I feel inclined to agree, answering one paradox with another by saying that we do not as yet take humour seriously enough. I should not write my avowal of optimism with so much conviction were it not for my confidence in the great and beneficial force of humour.
Laughter is not only the overt expression of humour, but it very probably constitutes the phylogenetic base on which it evolved. Laughter resembles militant enthusiasm as well as the triumph ceremony of geese in three essential points: all three are instinctive behaviour patterns, all three are derived from aggres- sive behaviour and still retain some of its primal motivation, and all three have a similar social function. As discussed in Chapter 5, laughter probably evolved by ritualization of a redirected threat- ening movement, just as the triumph ceremony did. Like the latter, and like militant enthusiasm, laughter produces, simul- taneously, a strong fellow-feeling among participants and joint aggressiveness against outsiders. Heartily laughing together at the same thing forms an immediate bond, much as enthusiasm for the same ideal does. Finding the same thing funny is not only a prerequisite to a real friendship, but very often the first step to its formation. Laughter forms a bond and simultaneously draws a line. If you cannot laugh with the others, you feel an outsider, even if the laughter is in no way directed against yourself or indeed against anything at all. If laughter is in fact directed at an outsider, as in scornful derision, the component of aggressive motivation and, at the same time the analogy to certain forms of the triumph ceremony, become greatly enhanced. In this case, laughter can turn into a very cruel weapon, causing injury if it strikes a defenceless human being undeservedly: it is criminal to laugh at a child.
Nevertheless laughter is, in a higher sense than enthusiasm, specifically human. The motor patterns of threatening under- lying both have undergone a deeper change of form and func- tion in the case of laughter. Unlike enthusiasm, laughter – even at its most intense – is never in danger of regressing and causing the primal aggressive behaviour to break through. Barking dogs may occasionally bite, but laughing men hardly ever shoot! And if the motor patterns of laughing are even more uncontrollably instinctive than those of enthusiasm, so, conversely, its releasing mechanisms are far better and more reliably controlled by human reason. Laughter never makes us uncritical, while enthusiasm abolishes all thought of rational self-control.
Indeed the reliable control exerted by reason over laughter allows us to use it in a way which would be highly dangerous if applied to militant enthusiasm. Both laughter and enthusiasm can, by appropriate manipulation, be used like aggressive dogs, that is, set on and made to attack practically any enemy that reason may choose. But while laughter, even in the form of the most outrageous and scornful ridicule, always remains obedient to reason, enthusiasm is always threatening to get out of hand and to turn on its master.
There is one particular enemy whom it is fair to attack to the barking tune of laughter and that is a very definite form of lie. There are few things in the world so thoroughly despicable and deserving of immediate destruction as the fiction of an ideal cause artificially set up to elicit enthusiasm in the service of the contriver’s aims. Humour is the best of lie-detectors and it dis- covers, with an uncanny flair, the speciousness of contrived ideals and the insincerity of simulated enthusiasm. There are few things in the world so irresistibly comic as the sudden unmask- ing of this sort of pretence. When pompousness is abruptly debunked, when the balloon of puffed-up arrogance is pricked by humour and bursts with a loud report, we can indulge in uninhibited refreshing laughter which is liberated by this special kind of sudden relief of tension. It is one of the few absolutely uncontrolled discharges of an instinctive motor pattern in man of which responsible morality wholly approves.
Responsible morality not only approves of the effects of humour but finds a strong support in it. A satire is, by the defi- nition of the Concise Oxford Dictionary, a poem aimed at prevalent vices and follies. Its persuasive power lies in the manner of its appeal: it can make itself heard by ears which, through scepti- cism and sophistication, are deafened to any direct preaching of morality. In other words, satire is the right sort of sermon for today.
If, in ridiculing insincere ideals, humour is a powerful ally of rational morality, it is even more so in self-ridicule. Nowadays we are all radically intolerant of pompous or sanctimonious people, because we expect a certain amount of self-ridicule in every intelligent human being. Indeed we feel that a man who takes himself absolutely seriously is not quite human, and this feeling has a sound foundation. That which, in colloquial Ger- man, is so aptly termed tierischer Ernst, that is ‘animal seriousness’, is an ever-present symptom of megalomania, in fact I suspect that it is one of its causes. The best definition of man is that he is the one creature capable of reflection, of seeing himself in the frame of reference of the surrounding universe. Pride is one of the chief obstacles to seeing ourselves as we really are, and self- deceit is the obliging servant of pride. It is my firm belief that a man sufficiently gifted with humour is in small danger of suc- cumbing to flattering delusions about himself, because he can- not help perceiving what a pompous ass he would become if he did. I believe that a really subtle and acute perception of the humorous aspects of ourselves is the strongest inducement in the world to make us honest with ourselves, thus fulfilling one of the first postulates of reasoning morality. An amazing parallel between humour and the categorical question is that both balk at logical inconsistencies and incongruities. Acting against reason is not only immoral but, funnily enough, it is very often extremely funny! ‘Thou shalt not cheat thyself’ ought to be the first of all commandments. The ability to obey it is in direct proportion to the ability of being honest with others.
It is not only because of these considerations that I regard humour as a force which justifies greater optimism. I also believe that humour is rapidly developing in modern man. Whether humour is becoming more effective because cultural tradition makes it more and more respected, or whether the instinctive drive to laugh is phylogenetically gaining power is not the essential point; probably both processes are at work. In any case, there is no doubt that humour is rapidly becoming more effective, more searching and more subtle in detecting dishonesty. I for one find the humour of earlier periods less effective, less probing, less subtle. Charles Dickens is the oldest writer I know whose satirical representation of human nature makes me really laugh. I can understand perfectly well at what particular ‘prevalent vices and follies’ the satires of late Roman writers or of Abraham a Sancta Clara are directed, but I do not respond to them with laughter. A systematic historical investiga- tion of the stimulus situations that in different ages made people laugh might be extremely revealing.
I believe that humour exerts an influence on the social behaviour of man which, in one respect, is strictly analogous to that of moral responsibility: it tends to make the world a more honest and, therewith, a better place. I believe that this influence is rapidly increasing and, entering more and more subtly into the reasoning processes, becoming more closely interwoven with and, in its effects, more akin to morality. In this sense, I absolutely agree with G. K. Chesterton’s astonishing statement.
From the discussion of what I know I have gradually passed to the account of what I think probable and, finally, to a profession of what I believe. There is no law barring the scientist from doing so. I believe, in short, in the ultimate victory of truth. I know that this sounds rather pompous, but I honestly do think it is the most likely thing to happen. I might even say that I regard it as inevitable, provided the human species does not commit suicide in the near future, as well it may. Otherwise it is quite predictable that the simple truths concerning the biology of mankind and the laws governing its behaviour will sooner or later become generally accepted public property, just as the older scientific truths discussed in Chapter 12 have done; and they, too, were at first unacceptable by an all too complacent humanity because they disturbed its exaggerated self-esteem. Is it too much to hope that the fear of imminent self-destruction may have a sobering effect and act as a monitor of self- knowledge?
I do not consider as in any way utopian the possibility of conveying a sufficient knowledge of the essential facts of biology to any sensible human being. They are indeed much easier to understand than for instance, integral calculus or the computing of compound interest. Moreover, biology is a fascinating study, provided it is taught intelligently enough to make the pupil realize that he himself, being a living creature, is directly con- cerned with what he is being told. Expert teaching of biology is the one and only foundation on which really sound opinions about mankind and its relation to the universe can be built. Philosophical anthropology of a type neglecting biological fact has done its worst by imbuing humanity with that sort of pride which not only comes before, but causes a fall. It is plain biology of Homo sapiens L. that ought to be considered the ‘big science’.
Sufficient knowledge of man and of his position in the uni- verse would, as I have said, automatically determine the ideals for which we have to strive. Sufficient humour may make mankind blessedly intolerant of phoney and fraudulent ideals. Humour and knowledge are the two great hopes of civilization.

There is a third more distant hope based on the possibilities of human evolution; it is to be hoped that the cultural factors just mentioned will exert a selection pressure in a desirable direction. Many human characteristics which, from the palaeolithic to recent times, were accounted the highest virtues, today seem dangerous to thinking people and funny to people with a sense of humour. If it is true that within a few hundred years selection brought about a devastating hypertrophy of aggression in the Utes, that most unhappy of all peoples, we may hope without exaggerated optimism that a new kind of selection may, in civil- ized peoples, reduce the aggressive drive to a tolerable measure without, however, disturbing its indispensable function.
The great constructors of evolution will solve the problems of political strife and warfare but they will not do so by entirely eliminating aggression and its communal form of militant enthusiasm. This would not be in keeping with their proven methods. If, in a newly arising biological situation, a drive begins to become injurious, it is never atrophied and removed entirely, for this would mean dispensing with all its indispens- able functions. Invariably, the problem is solved by the evolution of a new inhibitory mechanism adapted to dealing specifically with the new situation and obviating the particular detrimental effects of the drive without otherwise interfering with its functions.
We know that, in the evolution of vertebrates, the bond of personal love and friendship was the epoch-making invention created by the great constructors when it became necessary for two or more individuals of an aggressive species to live peace- fully together and to work for a common end. We know that human society is built upon the foundation of this bond, but we have to recognize the fact that the bond has become too limited to encompass all that it should: it prevents aggression only between those who know each other and are friends, while obviously it is all active hostility between all men of all nations or ideologies that must be stopped. The obvious conclusion is that love and friendship should embrace all humanity, that we should love all our human brothers indiscriminately. This com- mandment is not new. Our reason is quite able to understand its necessity, as our feeling is able to appreciate its beauty, but nevertheless, made as we are, we are unable to obey it. We can feel the full, warm emotion of friendship and love only for individuals, and the utmost exertion of will power cannot alter this fact. But the great constructors can, and I believe they will. I believe in the power of human reason, as I believe in the power of natural selection. I believe that reason can and will exert a selection pressure in the right direction. I believe that this, in the not too distant future, will endow our descendants with the faculty of fulfilling the greatest and most beautiful of all commandments.
