Chapter 8: ANONYMITY OF THE FLOCK

I am now going to take three forms of society as a primitive dark background with which to compare the society founded on per- sonal friendship and love. The first of the three societies is the aggregation of anonymous members. It is the commonest and doubtless the most primitive form of animal association and it is already found in many invertebrates such as Cephalopods, for example cuttlefish and squids, as well as in many insects. This, however, does not mean that it does not occur in higher animals; under certain horrible conditions even man can ‘regress’ to anonymous herd formation.
By ‘flock’ or ‘herd’ we do not mean that chance gathering of like individuals such as occurs when many flies or vultures crowd round a carcass, or when many winkles or sea-anemones settle on a particularly favourable place in the tidal zone. The concept of the flock is determined by the fact that individuals of a species react to each other by attraction and are held together by behaviour patterns which one or more individuals elicit in the others. Thus it is typical of flock formation when many individuals travel in close formation in the same direction.

The questions confronting the behaviour physiologist who is trying to understand flock formation do not only concern the mechanisms causing the individual to seek the company of its own kind, but they also more particularly concern the high selectivity of these reactions. It calls for explanation when a herd animal wants at all costs to be near a lot of other members of its own species, and only in dire necessity will content itself with animals of other species as substitutes. This herding together may be innate, as for example in many ducks which react select- ively to the signal of wing colouring in their own species by flying after it, or it may depend on individual learning.
We shall not be able to give a satisfactory answer to the many ‘Whys’ regarding the herding together of anonymous crowds before we have solved the problem, ‘What for?’ – in other words before we have answered Darwin’s question concerning survival value. In trying to do this we meet with a paradox: it was easy to find a convincing answer to the apparently senseless question, ‘What is the good of aggression?’ and we learned in Chapter 3 of its species-preserving functions, but it is extremely difficult to say wherein lies the survival value of the aggregation of the huge anonymous herds which we find in fish, birds and many mam- mals. We are too accustomed to seeing such communities, and since we ourselves are social beings we can appreciate that a herring, a starling, or a bison cannot feel happy by itself. And so it does not occur to us to ask, ‘What is it for?’ However, the justification for this question will immediately be apparent if we consider the obvious disadvantages of big herds, for instance the difficulty of finding enough food for so many animals, the impossibility of concealment, the increased predisposition to disease, and many other factors.
One would imagine that one herring swimming alone through the sea, one starling setting forth independently on its wanderings, or one lemming searching alone in times of famine for fertile fields, would have better chances of survival than would the dense crowds in which these animals herd together, and which provoke their own extermination by hunters and fishermen. We know that the drive forcing the animals together is a tremendously strong one, and that the attraction exercised by the herd over the individual or over smaller groups of individuals increases with the size of the herd, probably in geo- metrical proportion. Thus in many animals, for example bram- blings, a deadly vicious circle may arise. Under the influence of fortuitous external conditions, such as a particularly good beech-nut harvest in a certain area, the flocking together of these birds may far exceed its usual extent, the avalanche-like swelling of numbers may exceed the ecologically supportable limit, and the birds may starve in masses. In the winter of 1951 I had the opportunity of studying an enormous flock of these birds on the Swiss Thunersee. Every day there were many corpses under their roosting trees. Post-mortem examinations revealed that the birds had died of starvation.
I think we can conclude, from the proven disadvantages of life in big herds, that there must be advantages which not only com- pensate for but also so far outweigh the disadvantages that a selection pressure has arisen causing the evolution among so many animals of a complicated behavior mechanism of herding together.
If herd animals are in the smallest degree capable of defense against predators, such as are jackdaws, small ungulates and small monkeys, it is understandable that there should be safety in numbers. The repulsion of a predator or the succour of an assaulted member of the herd need not even be particularly effective in order to gain species-preserving value. The social defence reaction of jackdaws may not result in saving their fel- low from a hawk, but if it is just annoying enough to make him hunt jackdaws a little less eagerly than magpies and thus to make him prefer magpies as prey, this is enough to give social defence a very strong survival value. The same applies to the alarm call with which a roebuck pursues predators, or to the malicious screeching to the accompaniment of which many small apes, from the safety of the tree-tops, go leaping after a tiger or a leopard. From such beginnings, and by comprehensible transi- tions, the heavily armed defence organizations of bull buffaloes, baboon males and similar heroes have evolved, from whose defensive power even the most terrible predators shrink.
But what advantage does close herding together bring to the completely defenceless, such as herrings and other small shoal fishes, small birds in enormous flocks, and many others? I can think of only one explanation and I offer it tentatively because, even to me, it seems scarcely believable that a single, small, but widespread weakness in predators could have wrought such far- reaching consequences in the behaviour of their prey: this weakness lies in the fact that many, perhaps all, predators which pursue a single prey are incapable of concentrating on one target if at the same time many others are crossing their field of vision. Just try yourself to catch a single specimen from out of a cage full of birds. Even if you do not want a particular individual but intend to empty the whole cage, you will be astonished to find how hard you have to concentrate on a specific bird in order to catch one at all. You will also notice how incredibly difficult it is to concentrate on a certain bird and not to allow yourself to be diverted by an apparently easy target. The bird that seems easier to catch is almost never caught, because you have not been fol- lowing its movements in the immediately preceding seconds and therefore cannot anticipate its next movements. Moreover, you often end up by grabbing the void between two equally tempting objectives.
Many predators apparently do the same thing when offered a number of targets at the same time. It has been experi- mentally demonstrated that, paradoxically, goldfish catch fewer water-fleas when they are offered too many at once. Automatic radar-guided missiles behave in the same way when aiming at aeroplanes: they fly through the resultant between two targets if these are near together and arranged symmetrically on both sides of the projectile’s trajectory. The predatory fish, like the radar-guided missile, lacks the ability to blind itself voluntarily to one objective in order to concentrate on the other. Probably herrings swim in close shoal formation for the same reason as jet fighters fly in close formation across the sky – a strategy not without danger even for expert airmen.
Far-fetched though this explanation of a widespread phe- nomenon may seem, strong arguments speak for its correctness. As far as I know, there is not a single gregarious animal species whose individuals do not press together when alarmed, that is, whenever there is a suspicion that a predator is close at hand. The smallest and most defenceless animals do this the most notice- ably, and in many fish species only the small, young ones do it, while the adults do not. When in danger some species of fish crowd together to form a body, so that they look like one big fish, and since many of the large, rather stupid predators such as the barracuda meticulously avoid large prey for fear of choking, these tactics may be a special protection.
A further strong argument for the correctness of my assump- tion lies in the fact that evidently not a single one of the large predators ever attacks in the midst of a dense herd of its prey. Not only do the big predatory animals, such as lions and tigers, hesitate in the face of the defensive powers of their prey, before leaping on to an African buffalo in the herd, but even smaller hunters of defenceless game try, almost without exception, to separate a single animal from the herd before they attack it. Peregrine and hobby falcon have a special movement pattern serving this end alone. W. Beebe observed corresponding behaviour in fish in the sea. He saw a big amber jack following a shoal of little porcupine fish, wait patiently until one of the small fish separated itself from the group to snap up some still smaller prey. Each time this happened the small fish met its end in the stomach of the big one.
Wandering flocks of starlings make use of the bad marksman- ship of the predator to spoil his appetite for catching starlings. If a flock of these birds comes within sight of a flying sparrow- hawk or hobby they press so close together that one can hardly imagine that they can still use their wings. In this formation they fly, not away from the predator, but after him, finally encircling him, just as an amoeba flows round a particle of nourishment, enclosing it in a little vacuole. Some observers have asserted that by this manœuvre the air is sucked from under the wings of the predator, preventing him from flying, still more from attacking. This, of course, is nonsense, but an experience of this kind is certainly unpleasant enough for the predator to act as a deter- rent, and this fact lends survival value to the whole behaviour mechanism.
Some sociologists are of the opinion that the family is the most primitive form of social aggregation, and that the different forms of communities in the higher animals have arisen from it phylogenetically. This theory may be true of several social insects, such as bees, ants and termites, and possibly of some mammals too, including the primates to which man belongs, but it cannot be applied generally. The most primitive form of a ‘society’ in the broadest sense of the term is the anonymous flock, of which the shoal of ocean fish is the most typical example. Inside the shoal there is no structure of any kind, there is no leader and there are no led, but just a huge collection of like elements. Of course these influence each other mutually, and there are certain very simple forms of ‘communication’ between the individuals of the shoal. When one of them senses danger and flees it infects with its mood all the others which have perceived its fear. How far the panic in a big shoal spreads, and whether it is able to make the whole shoal turn and flee is purely a quantitative question, the answer to which depends on how many individuals become frightened and flee and how intensively they do so.
Stimulus situations which attract the fish can be responded to by a whole shoal, even when only one individual has received the stimuli. The resolute swimming of this individual in one direction draws the other fish with it, and here again it is a question of quantity whether or not the whole shoal is pulled along.
The purely quantitative and, in a sense, democratic action of this process called ‘social induction’ by sociologists means that a school of fish is the less resolute the more individuals it contains and the stronger its herd-instinct is. A fish which begins, for any reason, to swim in a certain direction cannot avoid leaving the school and thus finding itself in an isolated position. Here it falls under the influence of all those stimuli calculated to draw it back into the school. The more fish there are swimming in the same direction as a result of some exogenous stimulus, the more likely they are to draw the school with them; the bigger the school and its consequent counter-attraction, the less far its members will swim before they return to the school, drawn as by a magnet. A big school of small and closely herded fish thus presents a lam- entable picture of indecision. Again and again a small current of enterprising single fish pushes its way forward like the pseudo- podium of an amoeba. The longer such pseudopods become the thinner they grow, and the stronger becomes their longitudinal tension. Generally the whole advance ends in precipitate flight back to the heart of the school. Watching these indecisive actions one almost begins to lose faith in democracy and to see the advantage of authoritarian politics.
However, it can be shown by a very simple experiment how little justified this standpoint is. Erich von Holst removed from a common minnow the forebrain which, in this species, is the site of all shoaling reactions. The pithed minnow sees, eats and swims like a normal fish, its only aberrant behaviour property being that it does not mind if it leaves the shoal unaccompanied by other fish. It lacks the hesitancy of the normal fish, which, even when it very much wants to swim in a certain direction, turns round after its first movements to look at its shoal-mates and lets itself be influenced according to whether any others follow it or not. This did not matter to the brainless fish: if it saw food, or had any other reason for doing so, it swam resolutely in a certain direction and – the whole shoal followed it. By virtue of his deficiency the brainless animal had become the dictator!
The important effect of intra-specific aggression, dispersing and spacing out the animals of a species, is essentially opposed to that of herd attraction. Strong aggression and very close herd- ing exclude one another, but less extreme expressions of the two behaviour mechanisms are not incompatible. In many species which form large flocks the individuals never come nearer to each other than a certain minimum distance; there is always a constant space between every two animals. Starlings, sitting like a string of pearls at exactly regular intervals along a telegraph wire, are a good example of this spacing. The distance between the individuals corresponds exactly to the distance at which two starlings can reach each other with their beaks. Immediately after landing they sit irregularly distributed, but soon those that are too close together begin to peck at each other and continue to do so until the ‘prescribed’ Individual Distance, as Hediger appropriately called it, is established. We may conceive the space, whose radius is represented by the individual distance, as a very small, movable territory, since the behaviour mechanisms ensur- ing its maintenance are fundamentally the same as those which effect the demarcation of territory. There are also genuine terri- tories, for example in the colony-nesting gannets, arising in the same way as the perching distribution of starlings: the tiny terri- tory of a gannet pair is just big enough to prevent two neigh- bouring birds in the centre of their territories – that is when they are sitting on their nests – from reaching each other with the tips of their beaks if they stretch out their necks as far as they can.
It is only for the sake of completeness that I have mentioned here that gregariousness and intra-specific aggression are not entirely incompatible. In general, typical herd animals lack aggressive instinct and with it any individual distance. Herring- like and carp-like fish huddle together when disturbed, but also when resting, almost to the point of physical contact; many fish which are territorial and highly aggressive during the repro- ductive season, lose all aggressive behaviour when they come together in swarms outside the breeding season. This applies to many cichlids, to sticklebacks, and many others. The non- aggressive psycho-physiological state of swarming can usually be deduced from the special colour patterns of the fish. Numer- ous bird species have the habit of retiring, outside the breeding season, into the anonymity of the flock. This is the case with storks, herons, swallows and a number of song birds in which there is no bond holding the partners together during the autumn and winter.
Only in a few bird species, for example swans, wild geese and cranes, do mates or parents and children keep together in the big migrating flocks. The large numbers of birds and the close for- mation of most big flocks must make it very hard for individual partners not to lose touch. But most species which form large herds, flocks or schools seem to set no store by such individual contacts. Their form of society is of necessity completely anonymous, every individual is just as content with any one fellow-member of the species as with that of any other, and the bonds of personal friendship, which seem so indispensable to us, simply do not occur in these species.
The ties which hold such an anonymous flock together are very different indeed from those which lend strength and secur- ity to our own society. Nevertheless, one could imagine that personal friendship and love might well have developed in the bosom of the peaceful anonymous society, a thought that sug- gests itself the more readily since the anonymous crowd undoubtedly evolved phylogenetically long before the personal bond. To obviate misunderstanding I must here anticipate the theme of a later chapter, ‘The Bond’. Anonymous flock forma- tion and personal friendship exclude each other to a large extent because personal friendship is always coupled with aggression. We do not know of a single animal which is capable of personal friendship and which lacks aggression. This combination is par- ticularly impressive in animals which are aggressive only during the reproductive season, and which otherwise lack aggression and form anonymous flocks. When such creatures form any per- sonal ties these are dissolved with the loss of aggression. For this reason, in storks, chaffinches, cichlids and others, the mates do not remain together when the big anonymous flocks assemble for migration.
To our human mind personal friendship represents one of the most cherished values, and any social organization not built upon its basis inspires us with a chilling sense of the inhuman. This will become clearer in the next two chapters. However, even the simple and seemingly innocuous mechanisms of anonymous flocking can turn into something not only inhuman but truly terrible. In human society these mechanisms remain more or less hidden, being superseded by non-anonymous well- organized relationships between individuals, but there is one contingency in which they erupt with the uncontrollable power of a volcano and gain complete mastery over man, causing behaviour that can no longer be called human. This horrible recrudescence of the ancient mechanisms of flocking behaviour occurs in mass panic. I was once an unwilling witness of the sudden emergence and rapidly snowballing effect of this process of dehumanization, and if I was not drawn into its vortex it was only because, thanks to my knowledge of flocking behaviour, I had seen the approaching danger sooner than the others and had had time to guard against my own reactions. To me there is small pride in the memory; on the contrary, no one can put much trust in his own self-mastery who has ever seen men more courageous than himself, men fundamentally disciplined and self-controlled, rushing blindly along, closely huddled, all in the same direction, with eyes protruding, chests heaving, and tramp- ling underfoot everything that comes in their way, exactly like stampeding ungulates, and no more accessible to reason than them.
